[00:00:05.360] - Speaker 1
Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. I lived in New Jersey. I grew up in a little town called Chatham, New Jersey, about a half hour outside of the city. And my dad owned a record store down in Red Bank, down the shore by Springsteen country. And one of the guys that worked there was a guy in a band called Monster Magnet. You remember them? I love Monster Magnet. Yeah. So Monster Magnet. Dave. And then there was a guy named... God, I can't even remember his name anymore. It's sad. I can't remember. It was so long ago. He worked at my dad's store. And the other guy worked at the comic Book Shop in Red Bank because they weren't... You look at... It's It's so funny when you're young and you see someone in a band. Mentally, you're like, That person must have everything in the world. You think they live in a mansion, and they've got piles of girls around them, and and Everything is going PG Keen. And these two guys who I looked up to in their music and all that stuff were like, one worked at my dad's record store, and the other guy worked at the comic Bookshop, selling me Dark Knight comic books and stuff.

[00:01:43.050] - Speaker 1
And that was actually great to see, to know that it changed your perception of what success was because it isn't those things, the mansions and the cars and the this and the that. It's just the fact that they got to make music, and they did whatever they could to make music. And it's very hard to define exactly what success really, truly, truly is. I mean, I was born with no options. My earliest memories of growing up were about creating and being struck by images, like reference material. I started hoarding reference material in kindergarten. I remember there was a time where I learned to tie my shoes, and my teacher gave me this sticker of a dragon, and it was the body, and the head, and the arms, and and the tail were all separate, and you could do it. And I was so proud of this sticker. And not because I had tied my shoes, I just loved the way it looked, and I couldn't explain why, But I lost one of the arms in class during the day, and I was so upset that I didn't have that arm anymore for this thing. I couldn't find it, and she wouldn't give me another one.

[00:03:27.650] - Speaker 1
And I've just I've been, not to sound cheesy, but just been looking for that arm my entire life. I understand. When we were first grade, Battlestar Galactica and the Muppets were a really big thing. I If the day, the morning after Battlestar Galactica would come on, me and my friend would sit and have a drawing battle to replicate what we saw the day before.

[00:03:58.610] - Speaker 2
Was everyone in your school into the same stuff, or would you say you had particular interests?

[00:04:03.870] - Speaker 1
I was such an outcast.

[00:04:05.650] - Speaker 2
Even from the beginning?

[00:04:06.720] - Speaker 1
From the very start. There was no moment of going to school for me that was pleasant, except for things like that. I remember I had this great third-grade teacher that read us James and the Giant Peach, that book, and she would bring us Snickerdoodle cookies that she made us and read it to the class. And I just remember sitting there and visualizing that story in my brain as she was reading it to us. You have this skewed memory, but I thought she was probably the most beautiful woman in the world. And she was telling me this story, and she was feeding me cookies. And it was just like those little things really stuck with me.

[00:04:58.870] - Speaker 2
What was your home life What was it like at that time?

[00:05:02.380] - Speaker 1
My parents are great people. My mom's an interior designer. I still is. And my father, when I was growing up, worked in the printing business. Until I was about 12. He worked in Manhattan. I had a great childhood. I lived in an idyllic town with Suburbs? Super suburbs, yeah. Like, as suburban as it could possibly be.

[00:05:34.960] - Speaker 2
Did all the houses look the same as each other when you walked down the block?

[00:05:37.710] - Speaker 1
In certain parts. We lived in a really cool house because my mother was into designing homes. It was like this beautiful home made out of fieldstones that were pulled from the Peseic River that ran through our town. So it was actually a really beautiful house. They still live there. It was great. My house was great. I I had two friends that were super solid, and everybody else thought I was insane. I didn't know why. I couldn't understand it, but I didn't try to make people like me. I just did my thing. I was in my head a lot and drawing a lot, and just staying in my lane. I was always finding things. It's almost I don't know. I had a way of finding music and things years and years before they meant anything to the world. So I found a lot of peace in those places. You have brothers or sisters? I have a little brother, but he's seven years younger than me. So the first stretch of life was just me and my best friend, Don, who our parents met in LaMars' class. So we were basically twin brothers. Spent all of our time.

[00:07:05.140] - Speaker 1
They just came to visit me last weekend. So cool. It was Ronald Reagan, Jimmy Carter, and then Ronald Reagan. I really remember Ronald Reagan being elected President and sitting with my father in the living room on election night, drawing campaign posters for Reagan and hanging them on the walls in the living room because my dad loved Reagan. I wanted to... You want to... You have a close... I was close to my dad, and I wanted to impress him. So I was drawing around. I still actually have some of those drawings. All my memories are about music and drawing and hoarding pictures, magic catalogs. I held them like little secret Bibles, and I wouldn't show this stuff to anybody. I was always hiding stuff. I would make boxes and draw skulls and crossbones on them, keep out stuff, and hide the stuff inside those boxes. I did it with my candy. I would take old coffee cans and tape paper around them, make them look really nice, and draw skull and crossbones on them, and hide candy, and hide them.

[00:08:25.070] - Speaker 2
Would you know where things were?

[00:08:26.420] - Speaker 1
Oh, yeah. I knew exactly where everything was. But I I still do. If you ask me to find a matchbox car that I still have, I could go find it for you within 30 seconds. I'm very organized in here, especially for visual things.

[00:08:46.080] - Speaker 2
Let's talk more about hoarding. Was it always to be able to get back to it to reference it, or was it about something else?

[00:08:55.430] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I think I probably just found a lot of solace in this stuff because it was mine.

[00:09:01.920] - Speaker 2
When you say mine, do you mean physically mine, or this is an example of my taste?

[00:09:10.510] - Speaker 1
It was my taste, and I felt like I was the only person in the world that had it. It was always skulls that were the most important. When I would go through these catalogs and find a skull, it was like, Oh, my God. I would just study it and study it and draw it and draw it, draw it and draw it and draw it and draw it again. And like I said, still, luckily, my mom kept most of my stuff, so I have a lot of it.

[00:09:36.210] - Speaker 2
What's the first time you saw a physical skull?

[00:09:39.720] - Speaker 1
My best friend Dawn's dad had one, and it was in their kitchen. And they had all these cats and ferrets. And it was a really great house to hang out in.

[00:09:52.190] - Speaker 2
Live or stuffed?

[00:09:54.990] - Speaker 1
Live. Oh, okay. But there was just so many cats in their house, and eventually, a goat, and all kinds of cool... His mom had a skunk. It was really strange. It was the '70s. People just did stuff. I remember showing up in school in fifth grade. I had a British flag T-shirt, no sleeves, that I bought in the city, and I showed up at school. And that was one of the worst days of my entire life. There reaction at school. And then, sure as shit, six months later, every kid had a T-shirt. I had checkerboard vans. People would come and pour stuff on them on purpose and pick on it and steal them in, and steal them, and throw them in the trees, just stuff like that. That was what it was like at school. But I didn't really care. I wasn't I don't like sitting there crying. I don't know. I really appreciate that that happened to me at this point in my life. It was probably really hard at the time, but it definitely made me be me. And it's not like a poor me. I'm not saying these things because I feel bad for myself.

[00:11:20.750] - Speaker 1
It probably wasn't the only kid it was happening to. It feels that way when it's happening to you. But I got into Run DMC. I went to see the icecapades with my dad at MSG. And then Tower, I believe it stayed open till midnight. And my dad is a massive, massive music fan, jazz, Primarily. Jazz singers, cabaret singers, stuff like this, country. And so we went there. And you obviously-4th and Broadway? Yeah. Went So I went down there.

[00:12:01.110] - Speaker 2
Jazz section upstairs. Yes.

[00:12:03.340] - Speaker 1
He went up there. Tower had those incredible displays that they made. It wasn't like the record company, because they were the only store that had those things, and they were amazing. And I walked in and I saw the first run DMC album. So that was probably '84, I think, is when it came out. And I was always allowed to pick a record, and I bought that, and a tape, because I was really into my walkman, so I wanted the tape. And then you did, maybe a couple of years later, you did a record with them. And that was when I first heard of you and saw a picture of you. And I was like, Who the hell is that guy? You kept putting all this stuff out, dice and PE, and just these things that no one I was around was listening to at all. Nobody knew who any of these people were. And I would break dance in my backyard on this giant piece of cardboard by myself, listening to these, especially Run DMC and LL Cool Jay were the thing. And then in '87, Christmas Break, this kid gave me the first Boogie Down album, and that was It was like a whole other stratosphere of, Oh, my God.

[00:13:34.810] - Speaker 2
What else were you listening to besides hip hop at that time?

[00:13:38.420] - Speaker 1
Super into Bad Brains, Misfits, Black Flag, JFA, The Cramps, Minor Threat. I was listening to what I was seeing in Thrasher. The Misfits were from Jersey, obviously Skulls, and the music was so next level. Also with that, the movie element of it was really interesting to me, the influence of the movies on the song titles and what the songs were about. I was obsessed with the Misfits. I'm still obsessed with the Misfits.

[00:14:25.310] - Speaker 2
Did you ever get to see them live?

[00:14:27.010] - Speaker 1
No, I never went. I never went. Good show. I'm sure. It's like, I can't put into words how important the Misfits are to me. And what they did to my brain was like, I'm still dealing with it. And I loved Elvis. My dad still had, probably still does have, like his 45s from when he was a kid. And I would sit with him and listen. I'd be like, Dad, can we go upstairs and get the Elvis seven inches out of that closet? And he'd be like, All right. I'd dance. So Danzig was just... I was I was so happy a few years ago when Danzig finally just threw it down and was like, Did an Elvis covers album, and it's fantastic. I love it. I listen to it all the time. He was able to marry so many things.

[00:15:32.970] - Speaker 2
All of which were things you were into?

[00:15:34.830] - Speaker 1
All of them.

[00:15:35.550] - Speaker 2
Yeah, every one.

[00:15:36.530] - Speaker 1
I listened to it on albums that I still have, and it sounds one way, and I listened to it on Spotify, and it sounds another. I love Spotify. I think it's just fantastic to just have that. So convenient. All the time. I'm not a... Yeah, I want it to be... I want things to be convenient. Spotify, really. The day I heard about that, I was like, Yep, I'll do that. And you're able to just transfer back to all these things. I could be driving in someplace. I don't have my records, but I really want to hear Minor Threat right now, and I can. That's fantastic because I still just... I listen to some new music, but I still really just mostly listen to that stuff. I really loved early U2 as well. At that time, October and Boy, those records were really important to me. Having a record store... My dad bought this used record store in Red Bank, and then it was just like... That was my weekend job was to get up, go down to the store with him and work. I spent all of my time with him in Manhattan on the weekends, going through J&R and all these little record stores, and around Blicer Bobs and all these places.

[00:17:09.950] - Speaker 1
But then to be able to just be like, walk into a record store, but this is my record store. It's my dad's, but it's mine, too, I guess. So cool. And he sold Bootlegs, where we would... He had these cases of dead shows and Zeppelin shows, and Black Sabbath shows, and And one of my jobs would be, someone would come in and be like, I want this concert. And I would have to sit there and dub it for them. And then they'd come back a couple hours later and get the tape. And I'd have to photocopy it, and cut it, put it into the tape for them, and stuff like that. And then he sold posters, which was another massive way of gaining all this insight into visual information about live tour posters and stuff. A lot of Morrissey posters, and Cramp's posters, and bands that were doing stuff still at that time. And he would buy these posters from these suppliers in Europe that would send them. Poster delivery day was always really exciting to see what was coming. I would just sit there and then boot like albums, too. You remember the old…

[00:18:27.240] - Speaker 1
There was a lot of Zappa Bootlegs that I really liked. Zappa was another one I got into really early because he had a minor… Maybe it wasn't a hit, but I heard it on the radio, Don't Eat the Yellow Snow song. Then my best friend, Dawn's dad, bought us the tape of... That's Joe's Garage, I believe, right? That's on? I don't know. I think so. We'd listen to that in the car driving around.

[00:19:06.050] - Speaker 2
What was the culture of the record store? Would the same people be the people who would come to buy records?

[00:19:12.700] - Speaker 1
It was cool. It was like there was a little community down there. That was where I had some friends, too. There was some skaters because it was the beach. I knew some kids and kissed a girl and stuff like that, which I would never get the opportunity to in my town. And, yeah, it was a lot of regulars. Some guys that would come in and just stand there all day and tell you the same stories. But like, Bon Jovi came in one day. That was really cool. Bruce Springsteen would come into my dad's record store. That was really cool. Seeing the guys from Monster Magnet have jobs, seeing Bruce Springsteen in my dad's store, it just humanized heroes really early for me, which was really great. And I look at my life now and I'm sitting here with you. The people who I have relationships with in my life are people who are operating at the highest levels of whatever it is that they do. And some of them might be wildly fucking famous, or they make... They write movies, and nobody knows who the hell they are, but they're the best at it. I feel really lucky that I saw this.

[00:20:40.650] - Speaker 1
I don't have this fear of or idolize famous people and shit. I don't know what's the right way to put this. Do you understand what I'm trying to say? Absolutely. They're just people.

[00:20:54.030] - Speaker 2
And they are. And that was your experience from childhood, and you got to see it early, which takes away this. I think it could be a limiting belief if you feel like the only people who have success in the arts are special people, and they're not like us. That's not true.

[00:21:12.420] - Speaker 1
It's not even remotely true. It's not remotely true. I mean, you have to, probably as a producer, I would imagine a lot of what you see or have to do is witness the psychological traumas of the people that are creating music because it is psychologically traumatic to create. And that's the best part of it, I think, is having those fears, those doubts. You don't want that to go away, but you want to fight through it. You want to get through it. Now, at this point in my life, I come into the studio with no agenda and no plan, and I don't want one at all. Zero plan. I have this series I've been working on. It's over the last little over the last year and a couple of months, and I have one more painting to do, which I'll start later today. I have no idea- And then it'll be...

[00:22:24.300] - Speaker 2
And then the series is done? Yeah.

[00:22:26.060] - Speaker 1
I have no idea what that painting is yet, and I don't care. It will absolutely tell me what it needs to be at five o'clock tonight, and I'll sit down in my studio at my house. It'll just happen.

[00:22:41.350] - Speaker 2
Tell me the process. Where does it start? Does it start with you have an idea, and then you draw something, or does it start standing in front of a canvas?

[00:22:50.280] - Speaker 1
It's never the same, I guess. This particular thing I'm working on is I decided to take the white album and the wall and every other double fucking album of all time and try to make them all. I've made 96 paintings in a year. That's not normal. It's not what I've done in the past. I've never made a series this big. I've never made a series of paintings that has a story through it all. There's definitely a narrative to it. This was spawned by seeing a lobby card from an old serial. Which one? It's called the Moonriders, and the films do not exist.

[00:23:38.440] - Speaker 2
All that's left is the lobby card?

[00:23:40.150] - Speaker 1
It's the lobby cards and a couple of posters. I found a rabbit hole trying to find as much of this stuff as I possibly could. There isn't any. There's just nothing. I have 10 images that spawned all of this. Probably six I found on a tumbler once. And then I dug around finding old poster collectors and calling them. And I found a guy that had some, and I bought them. So I made a painting, one little painting, a 9 by 12-inch painting. And I showed it to somebody who I had a working relationship with. I was like, I'm thinking about making a series of these. And he was like, Don't do that. No, it's It's a terrible idea. Don't do that. And I was like, That's what I'm definitely going to do. One of my greatest ways of getting through life is considering the source, right? Of what this inform... Who who it's coming from. And you go, well, actually, there's nothing aspirational about... I don't look up to you for anything, really. So I don't trust your opinion. And I'm going to trust my gut because that's all I've got. You know that really, really well.

[00:25:09.490] - Speaker 1
So I just started making some, and then I showed them to I was texting one night with Damian Hearst, and just about whatever, catching up. And towards the end of it, I sent him that painting, the first one. And he was like, Whoa, what's that? And then I sent him another one. And he really responded very positively to what I was doing. He's somebody who I greatly respect and trust and has been remarkably generous to me in my life and helped me in ways that I can't understand.

[00:25:49.310] - Speaker 2
When did you first meet him?

[00:25:50.570] - Speaker 1
2013. He was introduced to my stuff and wanted to get some. I had this book that had come out, and my friend gave him the book via our mutual friend. He was like, I'd love to get that painting. I was like, none of those paintings are available. They're all gone. They're just in a book. But I'm making these new ones for this museum exhibition I was having. We worked something out, and he ended up purchasing these paintings for me. That was really, motivational.

[00:26:28.880] - Speaker 2
What are the ways that you How did you feel like Damien changed the game?

[00:26:34.200] - Speaker 1
I can only speak to how he changed the game for me. Okay. He taught me how to value myself. And he taught me a lot about methods of creating that I hadn't considered in the past. He changed the game by doing those things I I don't know that I should actually speak to them because they're... I don't know. It doesn't... He just pushed things in a way that no one else can do. I can't do it. It's impossible for me to do. I cannot do it. He took methods of working that Warhol did, but having this factory thing and took it to such a different level of polish and shine and glitz and glam, and fuck you's that no one's ever done. And I love his work. Love it. All of it, because I understand why it's there. It's important. It's like an album that everybody hates by a band, and you know they had no choice but to make that. He's somebody that doesn't have a choice. He's got to do it. You can't explain that. I don't want to explain his paintings. I don't want to explain my painting. I don't know what they're.

[00:28:04.720] - Speaker 1
I don't want to tell you what my paintings are about. My dad came here on Sunday with me to see this stuff and walked around and looked at it, and he asked me what it was about. And I know he wanted an answer. I wasn't able to be like, I don't want to tell you. I couldn't. That's my dad. So I didn't answer him. I was like, Look around it one more time. And he didn't. I don't know. He's old, and he's on a cane. Whatever. I understood why he couldn't do it or didn't do it. And then I went home, and I started working in my studio I have at home, and then jumped out of my chair, ran in, and found him, and he was on the phone. I was like, Put your phone call on mute. I can tell you what the paintings are about. And I was able to tell him what all my paintings are about, I guess, which is we are told that we are living in this world of divisiveness, and upheaval, and uncertainty, and fear and just tragedy all around us, right? That's what we are told we are doing, correct?

[00:29:44.350] - Speaker 1
That's the way it's presented to us. I want to make artwork that shows you that that is not true, that we are living in a world filled with unbearable amounts of love, unbearable amounts of gratitude. I couldn't pick a better time to be alive than right now. It's magnificent out there. Like everybody else, I have anxieties about things and visions of the worst case scenarios and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah I can acknowledge them, they'll hit me. I say something to myself. I acknowledge the love that I have inside myself and how deeply rooted and connected that is to every other person on this planet. Keep moving. That That's all I can do. I want to give people a glimpse of that, that that is possible to live that way because I live that way. I can't wish that everybody lived that way. All I can do is hope for myself to give people examples of that.

[00:31:22.930] - Speaker 2
Yeah, that's it.

[00:31:24.120] - Speaker 1
I met you a handful of years ago, but in 2018, I remember reaching out to you and coming over to your house, or up to Shangri-La, and talking to you, and you invited me back to meet Krishna Das. And through that experience, I was able to go meet Ramdas. And I don't know if I've ever properly thanked you for that. I don't even think you want me to thank you for that. But thank you. That was the most magical thing, and nothing happened. You know, I know there's a little documentary that was put out shortly before he passed away, where it just shows him going to the beach with a group of people, going swimming, and then going back and sitting in this room in his house, and looking out the window. And that's exactly what I did. I met him on the beach in Maui, went for a swim, held hands with him on the beach, He stared at me in a way. I mean, I'm about to cry. And then went to his house the next day. My friend Will Welsh was interviewing him for GQ. Great. We sat for three hours in his study.

[00:32:52.470] - Speaker 1
Will was interviewing him, but he and I looked at each other in the eye for three hours. And anything that was wrong with my life went away that day. And it's like things will come up and they'll be bad. Of course. But God, did I learn how to deal with them better after that experience. I've always studied and read. And I was introduced to Ramdass as a pretty young kid for my mother. Gave me be here now because I knew she knew I would be into the... She knew I'd be into the pictures. And she was listening to his lectures and on tapes. I have all of those now, too, which is really great. I knew all these things, but to sit with him and have him reflect back to me and Will and the world, I guess, eventually, when the interview came out, Will started off Ramdass had a go-to explanation of himself, right? Where he would talk about going and being at Harvard and da, da, da. And then Will asked him a specific question, and I can't recall what it was. It doesn't matter. But it clicked in him like, Oh, I don't have to be Ramdass magazine article version of myself.

[00:34:24.960] - Speaker 1
I can just talk to these guys. And then it was like magic hour.

[00:34:31.070] - Speaker 2
Got real.

[00:34:32.230] - Speaker 1
This guy who is so incredibly devoted to this loving awareness in the world is still gets pissed off at people and has bad feelings towards people and bad feelings about himself. And it's just like, you know that, but to hear it really come out of it, see him say it. This close, see him say it. He's human.

[00:35:04.720] - Speaker 2
Yeah. He's still human. Yeah.

[00:35:06.750] - Speaker 1
And he's one of the only people, though. He was somebody I couldn't look at that way. Yeah. He was too important. He knew too much because that's what you got when you read the books and stuff and listened to him talk. It was like, he didn't have a goddamn thing figured out except the love and how to stay there. And That's all we can do. It's actually pretty easy once you realize that. I know you're very interested in those thought processes and all those things as well. And that's why I had called to reach out to see you originally is I needed to talk to somebody because I was going through all kinds of shit, and I couldn't talk my way out of it. I'm not fooling myself to think that I've got it figured out just because I met Ramdass, and he made me feel a certain way. Staying in the practice of doing this stuff really helps to keep my... My anxiety is almost zero now. The only way I'll get a little anxious is if I don't eat enough and have too much coffee. And that's a very easy thing to fix.

[00:36:18.440] - Speaker 1
Just eat something.

[00:36:23.060] - Speaker 2
Would you say you were more anxious in the past?

[00:36:26.610] - Speaker 1
I went through a really long period of You can very easily, easily, correlate anxiety and financial success, where they just went and exploded. And I had, I was living in a state of crippling panic attacks, where like, Will Welsh was somebody who was like my speed dial who I could call when I was really losing it. Because when you have a panic attack, it feels like the entire world is just... I had had them when I was younger, but I wasn't living in a state of them. And I was living in a state of them. I was selling every painting I could make to every single A single person on the planet that meant something, and I was fucking miserable.

[00:37:36.760] - Speaker 2
So it was in success that you had the panic?

[00:37:42.080] - Speaker 1
Yeah, because I have no self-worth whatsoever. Zero. I don't expect to sell paintings. I've come to a much different place with it. I'm good with it now. I look at it totally differently. But at that point in time, it's really easy to understand it. I I was drinking, smoking cigarettes, eating pizza and hamburgers, and treating myself really, really, really badly. I thought I knew what these books and stuff were about. They were very much a part of my life. I was reading them. I thought they were getting in. I wasn't letting them permeate me properly. I It's a life's pursuit to let them do that for you. But I don't know. It's a bunch of different things happening. It's clicked more, right? Some of the things that I see in these books, my favorite being the Dao is the one that really resonates with me. I wouldn't call myself a Daoist. I just practice my version of the Dao. Does that make sense?

[00:39:03.170] - Speaker 2
Absolutely.

[00:39:04.580] - Speaker 1
I don't want any rigidity in it. I can't define it for anybody, but I know how I practice it. I know how I meditate. I know how I study these words, and I know what they do for me.

[00:39:19.550] - Speaker 2
I think the nature of the Dow is so open to interpretation anyway, that if you read this, you can read the words and then read them a year later, and they'll mean something completely Totally different.

[00:39:31.310] - Speaker 1
What I do is I wake up every morning, and that's how I start my day. I give myself 10 minutes of perfect quiet and breathing and staring at a window that's up high in my room.

[00:39:44.970] - Speaker 2
Do you do this in bed or do you get out of bed?

[00:39:47.940] - Speaker 1
No rule.

[00:39:49.290] - Speaker 2
Typically. Just describe, typically, what it looks like.

[00:39:51.180] - Speaker 1
I usually wake up, woken up, usually because I have a two-year-old son, so his noise will wake me up. My wife usually is the one that will go in and see him first, and I'll just sit there and breathe for 10 minutes and laugh and listen to what's happening in the other room, then I'll read a verse of the Dow. I actually open my phone and read. There's a Ramdass app, and every day there's these words of wisdom. There's 2-3 of them every day. I read those first, then I read my Dow verse, and then I'm ready to go. I'm up, and I go see my son, Otto, and that kid is 6 Sass, bro. My wife walked in here into my studio one day. A mutual friend brought her along on a studio visit, I went outside the parking lot to open the gate, and this girl opened the back seat of the SUV they got driven here in, and stepped out, and I've literally lost my breath. I was just like, Who is that? And now I'm married to her. I have a son. Congratulations. It's thanks. And, yeah, that's success, man. That love.

[00:41:32.740] - Speaker 1
I never wanted it. I saw my friends that had kids, and I'm going to guess you probably felt this way. You look at your friends that have kids, and you're like, Ha, it sucks for you. You don't get to go do this. You don't get to go do that. And luckily, I did get to go do all the things. Now I'm in my 50s. I have a two-year-old son, and it's like, It was the right time for me.

[00:42:01.600] - Speaker 2
Do you think your mom's eye for detail in her work influenced you in any way?

[00:42:09.280] - Speaker 1
A hundred %, yeah. We're like facsimilies of each other. I look a lot like my mom.

[00:42:17.910] - Speaker 2
Do you think it's genetic or do you think it's seeing her do it, her modeling it for you?

[00:42:26.000] - Speaker 1
It's hard to say. My father's super creative, too. He writes about jazz. My mom does her thing. My aunt is an art teacher. There's creative people. I was just brought up around creative people. They definitely didn't encourage me to do this. I can say that. There was a lot of budding heads, get a job conversations. I just wouldn't do it. I just wouldn't do it. I got a job when I was five at the pharmacy on Sunday mornings, putting new newspapers together because the Sunday papers came in sections, and you had to put them together. And I wanted comic books and toys, and that's how I got them. Sorry, not five, eight. I was eight. And then I worked in a rug store, which was all about detail and being around these beautiful rugs. And there was a very specific way to unroll them in a very specific way to reroll them. And I loved it. I took a lot of pride in how I did it. And then my dad opened his store, and I worked in record stores. And then in my mid-20s, I started to work at like Blue Chip Art Galleries in New York City.

[00:43:47.150] - Speaker 2
What motivated your move West?

[00:43:50.020] - Speaker 1
It was a couple of things, but I had this idea in 2000. 9:00 or early '10 that I wanted to come out and stay at the Chateau and make a series of drawings on that letterhead that you get when you stay there and they print your name on it, right?

[00:44:17.720] - Speaker 2
What started that idea? What was it about the Chateau?

[00:44:20.340] - Speaker 1
I had been there, and I just liked it. It was just a place. The first time I went there, it was just like, it's so storied, and I went and stayed there. It was the first time I could afford to stay in a really nice hotel. Expensive hotel. So I flew out to LA, and I went there. And I didn't have this crazy time I'm there, I just I left there feeling like I wanted to be there, right? I'd get this room, my home, any other home I've had in California, and studios I've worked in since I've I've been able to have studios. It's like, what a dump it is when I walk through the door. There's like, I just get this feeling.

[00:45:10.420] - Speaker 2
The energy.

[00:45:11.790] - Speaker 1
Yeah. And this place was just a disaster area. I bet. And I crossed the halfway point. This building is twice as big. I crossed the halfway point into the building, and I got to the beam that separates the space. It's buried in that wall now. And I looked in here, and I got the chills up my spine. Amazing. I was like, This is it. Amazing. Anyway, to go back to... It was like, the chateau just felt like a place to be for me. I just needed to be there. I didn't know why. So I Long convoluted story as to how I got there. I had nothing to... I didn't have a pot to piss in, really. But I found the money. I sold some works. I I got the money, and I came out here in early 2011 and rented room 34 in the chateau and lived there like I was supposed to be there because I was supposed to be there. How long were you there for? I stayed for 30 days, and I made a drawing every day. Then I went back to Brooklyn for a couple of weeks. Then I came back, and I rented the penthouse for a night and threw an exhibition up there, and it did really, really, really well.

[00:46:37.520] - Speaker 1
This was another thing that some people that I was working with in New York had discouraged this idea, to put it lightly. I was like, Well, I'm doing it. However I can do it, I'm going to do it. I did it, and it changed my life, man. I met a good buddy of mine, Darren Romanelli, in my room at the hotel. He came in, and I was listening to a Live Dead show, and he's a big deadhead, and we got to talk in, and he introduced me. He helped me get involved in a project for a Grateful Dead box set, and that was all happening at Rhino, Warner. I kept having to come out here for meetings with The producer of the Live Dead releases a guy named David Lemieux. So I was coming out here meeting with him. He's like an encyclopedia of Grateful Dead. Just a really cool guy. And I'd come out to LA. I'd stay at the Chateau. I'd have a fantastic time. Then I'd get back to Brooklyn, and I would be around a bunch painters. And there's just too much negativity going on around me. I don't understand how people have turned art into a fucking competitive sport, but they've figured out a way to do it, and I was not willing to play that game.

[00:48:19.710] - Speaker 1
I decided I was turning 40 in 2012, and I just decided to come and move here. I moved into the Chateau Marmot.

[00:48:31.260] - Speaker 2
Amazing.

[00:48:32.090] - Speaker 1
I had no plan. And so I just started drawing and making these paintings on paper, basically, because that's all I could really pull off in there. And did another one-night exhibition up in the Balushi Bungalow, and sold it out, I would say, in 10 minutes, literally. It was just like, yes. And the next day-It's not typical for an artist to sell his own work. No, that's another... That was something that I found That the system that I was presented with to work within was not the one that I was willing to do.

[00:49:24.640] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the system. I really know very little about the art world. What's the a typical path?

[00:49:32.900] - Speaker 1
I don't know if there's a typical one, but the relationship between a gallery and an artist is it can, at the level that I was operating at, which was not emerging, but not some... It's like emerging artists and mid-career artists and late-career artists. I was in between emerging and mid. And there's just this indentured servitude that you feel by the people involved in the gallery system.

[00:50:03.430] - Speaker 2
You feel like you work for the gallery when you have a gallery?

[00:50:05.220] - Speaker 1
They try to make you feel that way. Yes. That's not a game I'm going to play. I'm not going to do that. So the very short version of the long story I didn't say is like, I wanted to come to the chateau. The people I was working with said, No, we're not going to help you financially to do that. Get a kick starter. And maybe you can get... And I didn't even know what that was. They showed me what that was. I was like, I'm not doing that. You couldn't pay me to do that. Well, if you're not going to do it, then you're not doing that project. And I said, I quit. On the spot, I quit. Give me the couple things you have. My truck's outside. I'm out. Call the collector, sold a big painting, got 40 grand in my pocket, and spent it all to live at the Chateau for 30 days. And rolled it, and it turned into more than that. And then more than that. These are the times, though, where I was getting anxiety and panicky and tweaky about things, and I just kept... I'd answer the phone, and it would be the best news in the world, and I would have a panic attack.

[00:51:29.980] - Speaker 2
What's a call you would get that would put pressure on you?

[00:51:34.290] - Speaker 1
That was so difficult because it didn't feel like pressure to me in my mind, but my body felt it that way, I guess, and my mind subconsciously was doing that to me. I don't know. It was just like, so-and-so of world's renown would like to come meet you and buy a painting. And those calls were happening. Not once, But weekly, you know? And I'm so thankful for it. Yeah. I mean...

[00:52:08.520] - Speaker 2
Yeah. But tell me where the anxiety came from that. What do you think it is?

[00:52:15.410] - Speaker 1
I really don't know. I mean, the only thing I can answer for, the only thing that I can think of is having no self-worth of any kind. I'm a tall guy. I'm covered in tattoos. I'm relatively well-spoken, but I'm educated enough. I got a good head on my shoulders and stuff. Financially succeeded in this world. And up to a certain point, I just hated myself.

[00:52:49.790] - Speaker 2
What was your first tattoo?

[00:52:52.720] - Speaker 1
Got a little crappy line drawing version of a Jimmy Hendrix flying eyeball that Rick Griffin had drawn from a Jimmy Hendrix concert poster on my ankle. I think I was 16. This place in Jersey, Tattoo 46. A big old biker dude gave me the tattoo.

[00:53:21.830] - Speaker 2
How did you pick the image?

[00:53:25.040] - Speaker 1
It picked me, I think. I just walked in there and...

[00:53:29.400] - Speaker 2
You didn't know Well, before you walked in what it was going to be.

[00:53:31.610] - Speaker 1
No idea. I just wanted my first tattoo. I was obsessed with tattoos because spending all that time in New York City, I was seeing tattoos. In Chatham, New Jersey, you didn't see tattoos. But being in the East Village, you saw people with tattoos, and they were the scariest people on the street because they had tattoos. Tattoos weren't fashionable. They were a way of marking yourself as the outside. Yeah. And I mean, I had friends growing up after we had gotten out of high school, but we're still around the area, or they'd come home from college and stuff. Their parents didn't want me to come over because I had tattoos. That was a thing. And then all of a sudden, a lot of it... I was working at a tattoo shop. I was an apprentice in a tattoo shop when I got out of high school in Jersey. And this is '91. I'd say that was one of the last truly fantastic moments in American music, at least for me, was that era. So at that point in time, then the music that was coming up that became so big, all these guys had tattoos. And it was like changing the world.

[00:54:56.010] - Speaker 1
It was changing fashion. It was changing the tastes of the world, that music. Anthony was literally the most beautiful man on the planet at that time, and he had the most amazing, beautiful tattoos. It changed people's perception of tattoos. I saw it happen in the tattoo shop, live. We were tattooing thugs from the oranges in Jersey, and garbage men, and frat guys with their frat logos and stuff.

[00:55:38.270] - Speaker 2
So you worked in the tattoo salon?

[00:55:40.500] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I was like a... I would draw and make needles. And you make needles? You soldered them together. You'd buy, you'd get packs of needles, you'd have a bar, and you'd solder them together. You had jigs, and you put X amount of needles in the jig, solder them together. It was a Patience. A lot of patience to do that. But you got good at it, and I would take pride in being good at it. That was a great time. The music was so crazy. Again, I don't need to keep blowing smoke up your ass, but you were making a lot of it. I was working at this tattoo shop, and at the same time, there was a real wave of the rave scene happening in New York. I went with my boss at the tattoo shop. This guy, Kerry Brief, was his name. His name. We went to the Limelight on a Wednesday to this part.

[00:56:52.350] - Speaker 2
Which was an old church. Yes.

[00:56:54.020] - Speaker 1
Went to this party called Disco 2000. That was this amazing It was fucking crazy, man. Nothing like it on the plan. I'd never seen anything like it. The club kids that were on whatever. I remember they were on a talk show one day in the afternoon. They were on a Donahue type show or something like that. I knew all these guys were guys I was hanging out with. But then also, it was Tuesday. Wednesday was disco 2000, Tuesday or Thursday, I can't remember which one was the industrial night with ministry. When you first walked in, we were talking about nine-inch. I was listening to Nine Inch Nails. They were playing that and stuff like that. That was also a crazy party. It was so cool to go there on Wednesday, and the freaks that were into that scene were there. And then the next night, a whole other sub-genre of New York City and the surrounding boroughs would show up for this party. And it was so special. Did you ever go to Lime Light? Absolutely. That That couldn't happen today, I don't think.

[00:58:04.030] - Speaker 2
There was an incredible club scene in New York all through the time that I lived there. Yeah. Nothing like it. Yeah.

[00:58:11.610] - Speaker 1
There was that, NASA, which was down next to wetlands. And then Club USA opened. I remember Webster Hall. I remember going to Webster Hall opening night with Michael Alec, that guy that ran this party, Disco 2000. He I ended up killing a drug dealer and hacking his body up and going to prison forever. And there was a movie about him. He was my boss. Boss. I got paid 75 bucks to go to the club and have fun. It was really cool. I remember there was a room way up in the back of the back of the VIP area that HR Geiger had done. All this furniture was like all sculptural stuff that he had made. That was so cool. Unbelievable.

[00:59:09.850] - Speaker 2
Tell me about that moment when you're making something and you feel like, I have to walk away. What would be an example? Where would you be in the project? And what would the voice say?

[00:59:23.920] - Speaker 1
When I first started to paint, I would draw so much, right? And I was really confident in my drawing. Then I'd get in front of a canvas, and I would just fail instantly. And then I'd just paint over it. And then I'd start something else. I mean, you talk about this in your book, too. It's like you walk away from it on a Tuesday, and you feel like it's the greatest thing you've ever done in your life. And on Wednesday morning, it is dog shit. Yeah. It is. Yeah. Dog shit. So from when I really started to paint, I would say I was 25. So from 25 to 40, I drew, and then I painted. When I moved to California- You drew first and then painted the drawing? I would say, no, I would paint this much, and I drew this much in my practice. I see. I spent 15 years predominantly drawing. My drawings would get big. They'd get complicated. They were really... I'm proud of them. They were remarkable and hyperderivative of certain people, very much on purpose. This, because I looked at those people that I admired, and I looked at how they worked.

[01:00:58.130] - Speaker 1
And that's what they did. They looked at the people that they liked before them, and they copied the shit over and over and over and over and over It is quite possible to become hyper successful as a musician when you're a teenager and still be really fucking good at it when you're 70 years old. It's possible.

[01:01:26.560] - Speaker 2
It's possible, but not often.

[01:01:28.500] - Speaker 1
Not often, but it's possible. Yes, it is possible. Painting, it's not possible. It's not possible.

[01:01:34.080] - Speaker 2
You just have to grow into it.

[01:01:34.880] - Speaker 1
You have to grow. You have to have a life experience because paintings are generally not about I don't know. This is not going to be right either. But you could write a song when you're 18 about the girl that broke up with you when you were 17, and it could become a classic song for the rest of time. You can't paint a painting at 18 to create that same thing at 18 with a canvas. One person I know of has done that. That was Basquiat. He did it all by the time he was 27 years old, and he had a mastery of the history of very specific history of art, but a mastery of it. And he liked all the artists that I liked and that I looked up to. And he had this way of looking. He created a way of art. All art is talking to art that came before it. He had a way of taking art and turning it into the first Boogie Down record for me. The sampling, and layering, and bravado, and mystery, and violence, and romance that were like it was... They were identical to each other, to me, visually and sonically.

[01:03:15.080] - Speaker 1
Basically, those are the closest... That's how I can put them together. Seeing his work for the first time did the same thing to me that that Boogie Down record did to me.

[01:03:25.770] - Speaker 2
What was the first time he came across his work?

[01:03:28.590] - Speaker 1
I was in my I was probably 24, something like that. Never heard of him before that. My girlfriend at the time gave me a book for my birthday, and I was like, What? That is this?

[01:03:49.020] - Speaker 2
Paintings didn't look like that before.

[01:03:51.010] - Speaker 1
No.

[01:03:51.920] - Speaker 2
It was a new language.

[01:03:53.460] - Speaker 1
Yeah. And he was dead by the time I saw it, but not that dead. Yeah. No, he was... His spirit was hard.

[01:04:00.150] - Speaker 2
He was spirit was-He was just around in the same places that you were-yes. No time ago.

[01:04:06.810] - Speaker 1
And I spent a really... And I'm still hyper influenced by him. Hyper, hyper, hyper influenced ones, but unapologetically. Somebody comes in. I've had people come in here and be like, That looks like a Bosquiat. And I'll say, Thank you. Thank you very, very, very much. Because I dove headlong into understanding him and his process and what motivated him. And the corollaries were so strong between us, minus the fact that I'm a white guy, and he's a black guy. There were so many things that happened, and the things we were both drawn to were so similar. I felt like art is a conversation, music is a conversation. You're talking to the people that did it before you. And I decided to have a really, really in-depth conversation with Jean-Michel Basquiat and find what that could do for me. I remember just being, at first, being really scared of it and wanting to... That's where I would get lost on a canvas is I would try to not do the very thing that I should be doing, which was talk honestly and openly and copy what the hell that guy had done. And then I embraced the conversation, and my life changed drastically.

[01:05:40.500] - Speaker 1
And that's when those phone calls started coming, and The great opportunities started raring their heads. And just, yes, I am doing that. I am openly, publicly telling you I spent my life copying what that guy did and making my own new, fresh version of it because it is markedly different than what he did, but the structure is the same. Identical structure. Because the guys that I looked at, that That's what they did. And then all of a sudden, they didn't need to do it anymore. And I'm just, over the last couple of years, I have done something unique in here that is mine, and I know that. I had no plan other than that. First little painting and being told not to do it. And then that encouragement from Damian. And then set this parameter on myself that I had never done before, which was to make a gigantically ambitious body of it. There's 96 of these paintings. I've never made 96 paintings that went together.

[01:07:04.250] - Speaker 2
How did you pick the number?

[01:07:05.840] - Speaker 1
It was just thrown at me by a friend. You can get there. If you do that many, you should feel done. And I started doing it. And that number, for the first hour after hearing that suggestion, I was like, I can't do that. That's insane. That's crazy. I'm just one guy. And then I came to the studio the next day, and I made one. I was like, Well, there's one of them. Come back tomorrow and do another one. And this turned into... I've had many challenges with them as far as pushing myself and my technical abilities and finding finding things inside of myself that I didn't know that I had. I will not say that it has been easy, but it has been effortless. I've had no self-doubt because I had no point where I, after that first hour of saying I couldn't do it, and once I said, I can do it, I did it. I never was like, No, I'm not going to do this. I can't. I can't go on another day. About two weeks ago, my assistant Ben was with me, and we were in my house studio. I love painting at my house because I get to be around my son and my wife and not have to drive anywhere.

[01:08:48.410] - Speaker 1
And I was like, I'm getting sick of this. I was at like, 90. I was like, I just can't do any more of these. And instead of... I I just had to say it. And then I went right up to a canvas and I did that goddamn thing. And then I got really excited about it again. And I really fell in love with the whole process all over again.

[01:09:11.660] - Speaker 2
It's amazing how even a small breakthrough changes the whole picture, changes our understanding of what's happening. I can never do that. I will never do this again. Then even a glimpse of something interesting is enough to just erase that. Yeah.

[01:09:32.370] - Speaker 1
Those battles that you have with yourself, they never go away, but they get a hell of a lot easier to win, right? Yeah. In a shorter period of time. I've always won them, but some of those were 12 rounds, and they were draws. I've been going in and having early Mike Tyson fights with my paintings. That is a good feeling.

[01:09:59.590] - Speaker 2
Tell me the first time your work was hung in a museum?

[01:10:05.740] - Speaker 1
Well, I remember in 2003, I got a call that the MoMA had bought a suite of drawings of mine from a gallery that I was working with at the time, but I never went to see it installed, but I'm pretty sure it was installed in this collection. But then in 2014, I had sold stuff to museums in Europe, but I had never gone to see any of it. But then in 2014, I was given an opportunity to do a survey show at a place in Denmark called the Aarhus Museum, which is in a tiny college town called Aarhus. It's one of the most magical towns I've ever been to in my life. They came to my studio in Brooklyn because I was still there when this was conceived. But then by the time it was happening, I was living here. But the idea was to replicate my studio in Brooklyn inside of the museum because my studio is an interesting place, and the one in Brooklyn was smaller and jammed up. It had a different vibe. I was a different person. So I lived in a little apartment around the corner from the museum for a month and went and worked in the studio that they built me a footprint of Brooklyn in the museum.

[01:11:54.510] - Speaker 1
And I went there and made paintings and made it covered in paint and pinned little pictures all over the place and shipped my books, like everything. It was really cool. That was the most memorable experience I've had with a museum. Other things have gone to museums over the years, but I've never gone to visit them.

[01:12:17.200] - Speaker 2
Do you think there's a spiritual aspect to your work?

[01:12:23.530] - Speaker 1
For myself? Absolutely. It's my It's my practice. It's my way of... One of the ways I can meditate, and I can do it for many, many, many, many hours. So you just zone, and I don't have to talk. That's one of the great things about this job, is I don't have to speak to anybody to do it. So I can sit in absolute silence alone. Or even if there's music, I mean, you know what music can become the soundtrack to the silence that you need, even though it's on, it becomes that headspace you need. It creates an internal silence, right? Like a good song can quiet your mind like nothing else. I think I touched on it earlier, is like, I would like for my paintings to make people feel something, to feel a desire to look at the world in a different way. One of the greatest things that happened in my work life, my uncle, it was very close to my uncle, Bill, and he had made me a copy of The Power of Intention, the Wayne Dyer lecture. And he gave it to me. At the time, I had this big wall of CDs in my studio.

[01:14:16.020] - Speaker 1
And I was about to start a project for Art Basel in 2004, I think it was. And he had given me this stuff. I took it, put it in my CD case. Couldn't even see it. And I went to reach up for something. And it's like this set of disks just shot out and landed on the floor. And I picked it up, thought of my uncle, walked over, put it in my 6 CD changer, turned it on, started this group of drawings I was going to do. I drew all these drawings of myself dressed up as a zombie from a Halloween costume that I had had. And all I did was draw myself with a snake coming out of my head and blood all over me. And I just wrote everything he was saying that meant something to me on these drawings, all over them. And I just listened to it for a month. And then I went to Miami. We installed this stuff. I had no expectations of any kind. I wasn't killing it by any stretch of the... I was making a living, but I wasn't... And then I was just going to the beach and hanging out with friends and doing whatever during the day.

[01:15:48.520] - Speaker 1
Every 10 minutes, my phone kept ringing. Sold another one, sold another one, sold another one, sold another one. That was a turning point where I had always been writing on stuff, but what I was writing changed, and what I was putting out changed. That was a stepping stone in my life where I was treating myself badly, but I needed to treat myself better. I had a moment where I did it, and it made work that I was really proud of. And it succeeded in helping me. And it succeeded by going out into the world as well. And it was successful in a myriad of ways. So that started a practice for me where I was really intentionally placing these texts that I was studying into my artwork all the time. And it was the beginning of me really, truly Getting to make a real living at this.

[01:17:03.070] - Speaker 2
Amazing.

[01:17:03.830] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[01:17:05.600] - Speaker 2
Let's look at the Dao, and I want you to randomly open to a page and read to me what's there. And let's see how it impacts what we're feeling today.

[01:17:19.890] - Speaker 1
Without going out the door, you can know the world. Without looking out the window, you can see heaven. The farther you travel, the less know. Thus, the wise person knows without traveling, understands without seeing, accomplishes without acting.
