[00:00:07.320] - Speaker 3
Tétragrammaton. I think there's a certain instability about an island in that specific location in the North Atlantic Ocean, where it's the volcanic eruptions every other, every third year, it seems these days, and the earthquakes and the high contrast between the seasons.

[00:00:43.870] - Speaker 1
We have basically two seasons, the dark and the bright season, the winter and the summer. Every year, the idea of autumn and spring is just a deception, and we fall for it every year. You might have snow in May, and you never know what's going to happen.

[00:01:03.510] - Speaker 2
Is that so Icelandic winter is May?

[00:01:07.080] - Speaker 1
No, Icelandic winter is basically from October. So we basically have... We just have a summer season like June, whatever, July, August. But it's brief and it's wonderful. It has a white night, so complete daylight. It's amazing to actually make music at summer solstice in Iceland. It's amazing. It's interesting. But it has the light, but it also has the focus of the slightly colder temperatures, the crispness of the air. But I think also growing up in Iceland, it's a different question to ask me as opposed to asking my sons because growing up in the '90s is such a, in retrospect, wonderful thing. Growing up without the internet, without YouTube, and without all of it, without Spotify and all those things. It's so wonderful to grow up not aware of anything really outside of your little island and just get the luxury of being the best at playing piano, building a I thought of myself as an international pianist since I was 10, and I wasn't, of course, but that's how I defined it myself.

[00:02:22.400] - Speaker 2
That's interesting. That's an interesting idea that you thought of yourself that way at a young age.

[00:02:27.180] - Speaker 1
I think it's something that many people have in common who do something like this to define themselves quite early on, whether they admit it or not. When I met my first piano teacher, I was five, and I was actually accompanying my older sister to her music school, and we were picking her up or something, and I met this lady, Erdla Stefan-Støttir, who was a very famous person in Iceland, not for her piano teaching, but for seeing through mountains and believing in elves and different worlds. She was a very spiritual woman. She asked me, Would you like to learn how to play the piano? And five-year-old me said, I know how to play the piano.Wow, good answer. Which is ridiculous.

[00:03:07.960] - Speaker 2
Good answer.

[00:03:09.060] - Speaker 1
But I felt like I knew how to play the piano my way. I played the piano.

[00:03:14.750] - Speaker 2
Did she become your teacher?

[00:03:16.490] - Speaker 1
She did.

[00:03:17.120] - Speaker 2
Tell me what it's like learning to play piano from somebody.

[00:03:21.780] - Speaker 1
It was wonderful because she was... Maybe she was a great teacher, not a great teacher. She was great in that she had just inspired joy with the music. There were not so many mistakes, but not so great, perhaps because there weren't so many mistakes. It wasn't the most disciplined way of teaching, but she always put me at the end of day for her schedule, so she could spend extra time with me. We would just go on and on and on. I would just play, and we would think she was enjoying it as much as I did. But it was basically about the fundamental joy of getting that response from the piano. Just having that dialog with the instrument that started early on She would never make me play really scales or all the strict technical academic exercises that we then have to go through at some point, most of us. It was just the response to music. I was very lucky in that way.

[00:04:15.180] - Speaker 2
Would she play for you?

[00:04:16.870] - Speaker 1
A little bit, no, not much. Almost nothing. She would just smile at me. That was the feeling. It was for joy. It wasn't for suffering.

[00:04:29.050] - Speaker 2
Was it a feeling of acceptance, or how would you describe what you felt from her?

[00:04:35.470] - Speaker 1
Acceptance, absolutely. That's a good word. But I think also just celebration. She was a very spiritual woman, and you could see how touched she was by the music. That affects you as a child very early on. You learn from that as much as from the skill of actually playing the piano. You learn by seeing people being inspired, it grows something inside you. I I believe that now. I think it was free, but there were no piano competitions. There was no direct comparison. I was simply the best there was in that school, and that was it. I would never practice out of duty. My mother, who was a piano teacher, and my father, architect and the composer, they would rather encourage me to not play the piano quite so much and just go out and play football with my friends and do whatever, just to be a normal kid. That was the direction. Whenever there was media attention on me as a kid, they would turn it down just to keep everything very, very private.

[00:05:37.990] - Speaker 2
Do you remember the first time you played in front of people?

[00:05:40.970] - Speaker 1
Yeah, when I was five, six, first year. And I remember it was hilarious, actually, because I was told not to forget to bring my music book with me on stage. But I always memorized things and I learned them by heart. So five-year-old me just thought, Okay, I'm supposed to bring the music book. And I brought I had the book under my hand, and then I didn't know what to do with it. So I played the whole concert with the book here and my elbow like this. I just started playing. Then I took a bow and left the stage and was like, What's the deal with the book? So I know that that's how you do it. Playing for people was always something I looked forward to. I didn't realize that things could really go wrong. It's a privilege for everything.

[00:06:24.850] - Speaker 2
How different is playing the same piece in a room by yourself versus playing it in a theater full of people?

[00:06:33.380] - Speaker 1
It's not one experience or two experiences to compare. It's like every night is different, just like we are different from day to day. I feel like it's a discovery, every single concert others. But there are two sides, the introvert and the extrovert side. I think we need both. Just like I need the studio, which is the introvert side, and then I need Carnegie Hall, which is the extrovert side. Couldn't be without people, though. But I think about this all the time. What should be the proportion in my musical life as a pianist? Live touring, which today is actually quite extensive, and then the home time, the scheduled time for nothing, but then for everything perhaps to happen. I'm drawn more and more to the idea of going into 50/50 splits. I think that's something that has been lacking a little bit in my life in the last 10 years. It's been incredibly busy, basically, touring the whole world and trying to get to know my audience and allowing my audience to get to know me a little bit. But I see it different now. I just turned 40, and I see a different decade I had, and I want to really...

[00:07:51.910] - Speaker 1
What do I want? I think I want to make Glenn Gould turn in his grave with jealousy of the live in the studio. Imagine if an ideological man like him would have actually had the luxury of the modern studio with all the creative possibilities that technology affords us. Yeah. So I want to go more into that. But it's a little bit like a studio is where you tell people very confidential things and you whisper your secrets to the microphone. The concert is something else. It can be very intimate and it can be very personal, but it's never entirely intimate. There's always 3,000 or whatever. There's 2,000 or whatever, the exercise. That's always a mix. But I'm building my own studio now under my own house happening right now in Rikyik. That is my gift to myself. I know you know that gift very well, having built all these studios around the whole world.

[00:08:46.660] - Speaker 2
There's something about having a place to make music that is not a corporate environment. Having windows in the studio is really nice. Absolutely. Changes everything.

[00:08:56.570] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I went for the golden ratio in the shoe box. The size of that. My whole house is a gorgeous house, 1960s in Iceland. Perfect for me, time in architecture. We just analyzed the house, and I don't know if it was on purpose, but the whole house is in the golden ratio, my favorite ratio. Of course, we've done the studio like that as well.

[00:09:19.790] - Speaker 2
You say that your first teacher had a spiritual relationship to music. Would you say you have a spiritual relationship to music?

[00:09:26.820] - Speaker 1
Music is my spirituality, absolutely. Yeah.

[00:09:30.800] - Speaker 2
How do you describe the connection you and music?

[00:09:36.030] - Speaker 1
It's like plants and water. It's my water.It feeds you.It feeds me. Do we feed the music? I don't think so. We gain from the oxygen. I think we get from the water. I love it more and more, I guess. The older I get and the closer to death we are in our lives, the more it seems to matter to me. When I was young, it was a game, and now it is something more than that.

[00:10:06.320] - Speaker 2
Is there ever a time when you play in front of people where you forget that there are people there?

[00:10:10.060] - Speaker 1
All the time. All the time. Are you joking? Yeah, I'm afraid. All the time. But I think that's sometimes the aim, and sometimes it's not the aim. Sometimes, for instance, if you play in the BBC proms and you have all these people there and they're just there on the floor with you, you don't really forget about them because they're in your face. But I alwaysalmost always turn my audience into a… It's a very dark room that I have. It's a very single spotlight, very simple setup, where I want to have the luxury of being able, perhaps, to forget about everything and forgetting about myself as well. Sometimes it's like when I'm playing the Goldberg Variations of Bach, it feels like a meeting with him somewhere in between 2024 and 1741 when the piece was written. It's a strange thing. Philip Glass said, Music is a place as real as any place you've ever been to. I think it's a wonderful quote. We go to that place, and that's maybe the goal.

[00:11:12.410] - Speaker 2
You mentioned when Bach lived and when I hear you play box music, it's written 300 years ago, it feels completely modern to me, and I don't completely understand it. You're not changing the music. You're playing the music as it was written. But for for some reason, you're bringing something modern to it. Is it something you're aware of or aim for, or is it just an organic thing that happens?

[00:11:41.140] - Speaker 1
I'm glad you think it's modern because I feel very much like Bach's music is more modern than anything I play by any living composer. I work with some of the very finest composers. He seems to me always to be the future. Why is that? You say that it's true that I don't change the music, but I do change the music because I don't change the notes and the proportions of rhythm inside the score. But that's where it ends because he doesn't write almost anything about how to shape those notes. There are almost no dynamic markings. The tempo markings are so open and so broad. Anyway, what do we know about how people felt the in the 18th century when the horse was the fastest way of traveling? Of course, Bach couldn't have dreamt about the modern grand piano that I'm using. But I feel like it's a weirdly minimal maximal tension in Bach, maximal in terms of the greatest musical structures ever created, in my opinion, and minimal in the sense that they're completely open. An old man said to me late in the 20th century that Bach is a free country. Wow, that's beautiful.That's beautiful.

[00:13:05.610] - Speaker 1
That stays with me. His name was Georgi Shebak, who was a very great Hungarian pianist. Bach is a free country. I think of that all the time. Then I feel like with Bach, you have to take a stance in so many different ways in every single moment in time. In every measure, you make so many decisions in the moment and different in each performance. When you play the Goldberg Variations, two nights in a row, it's really two different pieces. Yeah. In a way, you feel very much like a co-creator in a very compositional sense with Bach, even if you're playing his eternal text. You are still in a way, creating and such a big part of it. To play that music, which is built as much on harmonic blocks, but even more on linear, on the horizontal, on the way these voices and the texture on this polyphony How you have two, three, four, five voices speaking to each other, just like actors on a stage, where you sometimes feel almost like a theater director when you're playing Bach, giving these different voices their unique roles and allowing them to take the spotlight, but always to keep the supporting actors absolutely alive, as in any good staging of a play.

[00:14:22.930] - Speaker 1
That's how it can feel with Bach. You feel sometimes more like a director than a pianist. To then bring that to the studio and to think about how we record the piano, which is a very difficult thing to do, actually, with success, to get the three-dimensionality of the piano, as opposed to that very often two-dimensionality and push it in your face approach of piano recordings. That is one of the most fascinating challenges and one of the most creative things I know. To me as creative, dealing with the microphone setup before the Goldberg Variations recording as perhaps writing my music or doing whatever, arranging something. It's so interesting how moving the microphones or centimeter here or there changes the narrative. For instance, in the Goldbergs, we actually placed, for the first time I tried this, two mics just above my head because I wanted to really give people, the listeners, the impression that they were basically playing the piece themselves, almost. So the sound and the way we record with Christopher Tano, he's my dear soulmate producer, and Christian Bazzura as well, my wonderful ANR from Deutsche Grammophon Universal. The way we do that is such a musical joy.

[00:15:42.830] - Speaker 1
That's why I mentioned earlier Glenn Gould and how I wish he had the opportunities that we have today.

[00:15:54.030] - Speaker 2
One of the things that really strikes me as modern about your playing has to do with a rhythmic interpretation that, again, I think if you look at the music, it hasn't changed, but there's some internal rhythmic thing going on when you play it that's not in Glenn Gould, and that I hear the person playing now, he's heard hip hop music. He's listened to hip hop music. I'm not saying it's inspired by hip hop music, but it's played in a world where hip hop music exists. I can feel those inner rhythms that I don't hear in old recordings, even the greatest old recordings. It brings it even more to now.

[00:16:39.160] - Speaker 1
I like the idea of hearing like Kendrick Lamar and the Goldberg variation. That's hilarious. Going back to Cool. I mean, his favorite artist in those days in the '70s or '60s was Barbara Streisand. Oh, fantastic. I didn't know that. She's amazing. But yeah, I mean, we have to embrace our times. We can't escape them. That's why I always think it's interesting, but sometimes a little bit arrogant when people pretend to know the correct historical way of playing music, old music. It's so strange. As if the composers would play the Goldberg variations twice the same. If Bach was here today in Los Angeles, coming to Disney Hall, would you play the same tempo, the same expression? Would the piece tell him the same narrative two nights in a row? I'd bet my right kidney, it's not going to be the same. No, But I think we have to embrace it. Coming from my little island, Iceland, I think this is one of the perks of coming from that island, that we do many different things out of necessity, perhaps. We are very few, and it's a very small and very intense musical scene. I'm not so much a part of it anymore because I'm just always somewhere out in the world.

[00:17:51.390] - Speaker 1
But as a teenager, I played in a big band, and I've done rock quintet improvisations a little bit like Emerson Lake in Palmer style. I've done my weird things as well. I think people back home in the symphony orchestra, some of them play heavy metal on Friday nights, having played a Mahler symphony on a Thursday, which is to be celebrated created. I did my duet with Björk, et cetera. That's so many. I think perhaps that has to feed into the way you play music, and perhaps in particular, how you play baroque music and even more in particular, how you play Johann Sebastianbach. I think he becomes very easily a mirror for those who play him and for those who listen to him.

[00:18:39.970] - Speaker 2
To me, the music is Baroque, but your interpretation is not, even though It's very by the book. It's like you're not reinventing the wheel. That's what's so interesting to me about it is how it can be so similar and so different at the same time. That's my experience as a listener.

[00:19:00.330] - Speaker 1
Sometimes I just think like when you're making a record, and I wonder how you feel about that. The one thing you need to always be is specific. When you play Bach in terms of rhythm, in terms of the exact voicing of what you're doing and the exact proportion of time you steal there on that note and then give back in the following measure. How specific can you go? If you go specific, usually you go honest because being specific means you have to I've heard somewhere, I think, beyond your ego. If you really want to be specific, you go beyond yourself, almost. I think that is sometimes what happens, and I think what you are trying to describe. I think every recording is different, but they all have to be specific.

[00:19:45.010] - Speaker 2
Is everything always intentional or does it just come out that way sometimes?

[00:19:49.780] - Speaker 1
I think life is incredibly improvisatory. I think sometimes I work really hard, and I'm quite serious about what I do. I don't ever feel like I'm really working. I just play. But I think I make so many decisions in the process of preparing just in order to forget them in the moment of doing. So Yeah, you study to be able to forget everything in the moment and do something completely different. Because I feel like actually with myself, at least, maybe I think it might be lack of talent, but I think I actually need to go through that insane process of sometimes overthinking and over-deciding everything in order to surprise myself and allow my subconsciousness to take over a little bit.

[00:20:42.160] - Speaker 2
How different are performances for you night-to-night Sometimes very different.

[00:20:48.980] - Speaker 1
But pianos are different, and audiences are different. When you play, let's just take two cities, like let's say, New York and Tokyo. When you You play in Carnegie Hall and Suntory Hall, come onto the stage in Carnegie Hall, and it's a Friday night, and it's a party, and you feel the vibes. You come onto the stage, and you have what I think is the greatest acoustic in the world. Sounds like a cliché because it's Carnegie Hall, but actually, that cliché is true. You play a performance, and it's that Friday night in Carnegie Hall with those people in that mode. Then you go to Century Hall in Tokyo, and you have the most unbelievably beautiful audience, and they applaud, and the applause is so rapid. They really work for the applause there. Then you sit down and... Silence. Like a like a zipper. When that happens, I always think, Oh, I've just lost my It just feels like, oh God, it's like a vacuum. Then you play and it's a very different occasion. It becomes sometimes perhaps more sacred, can you say? Or it's It may be elevated, but it's just different and it's not better.

[00:22:04.260] - Speaker 1
Perhaps I prefer the human element there in Carnegie Hall, even if a cell phone goes off in variation 15 or something. But these two concerts, just to give you one. I played the Gold Book variations now, and I don't know, I've stopped counting, but I think it's 96 or seven concerts or something like that, almost everywhere in the world. I'm not tired with the music because I feel like I'm doing, at this point, the 85th variation on the Goldberg variations. The piano is a living creature. People don't realize sometimes that one grand piano has 12,000 plus parts, and they are living and breathing, I dare say. It's wood and it's steel and it's iron. It screws and it's strings. Every temperature that goes up one degree or two changes the piano, changes us. Yeah, the piano is a society in a way. And that society is not stable, and no society is stable, nor should it be. It's very living. So yeah, if the humidity goes up 5%, I feel it in the piano, and that comes through in my music making and the choices I make on stage.

[00:23:26.810] - Speaker 2
Do you think the energy in the audience goes beyond what you hear? You described two different audiences, one's noisy, one's silent. If you took the sound equation out of it, being in the room with those different groups of people, would it feel different in the room?

[00:23:46.220] - Speaker 1
Yeah, don't you think so?

[00:23:47.470] - Speaker 2
I think so, but I want to know what you think.

[00:23:49.990] - Speaker 1
Yeah, but we're having a dialog. Yeah, I think so, inevitably. But I'm more and more interested now also just in the Every room as an instrument. I was just reading about Carnegie. I was wondering, why do I love it so much? I found this book. Someone sent me a page from a book that is like, I think it It used to be about 100 years old, this book, but it did sound measurements, sound duration for different pitches. Turns out that the duration of both the low frequencies and the higher frequencies and everything that are in between in Carnegie Hall is remarkably even. So that the room really resonates basically all over as it does on the stage, close to the instruments, which is so beautiful because most rooms with the lower frequencies, they cancel out the smaller birds. Yeah.

[00:24:46.100] - Speaker 2
Have you played at Disney Hall before?

[00:24:48.020] - Speaker 1
Yeah, many, many times.

[00:24:49.810] - Speaker 2
How's that experience?

[00:24:51.610] - Speaker 1
It's beautiful. It's completely different because it's a vineyard, a setting where you have audience everywhere around you. It's beautiful. It's not Carnegie Hall, but it's such a good atmosphere.

[00:25:06.470] - Speaker 2
How is it different playing Bach in Germany, in Leipzig, versus playing it in New York or playing it in Iceland?

[00:25:15.560] - Speaker 1
It's a good question. I think sometimes when you have that much tradition, I sometimes wonder, how is it to come from the country of Bach and Beethoven and Wagner and all of them. When you have that much tradition, I wonder if you bring with yourself slightly more baggage to the occasion. I don't know. I feel like the response They love the music so dearly in Germany, and they're so proud of it, and it's such an amazing crowd I have there. They're so serious about it that perhaps they lose some of their freedom in response to it because it has such a history. It's wonderful sometimes to play for some of my audience, like in Vienna, actually, where you do have that history. But I played two nights, and on the second night because the first one sold quite fast. Then you had all these young people, and the Vietnamese press wrote about, What are all those scenes doing in our concert hall because it was all young people. And I thought that was a great response and you felt the difference. Absolutely. I think it can be wonderful not to have too much history. That's why perhaps being a performer or pianist from Iceland, and in by the way, the first Icelandic touring pianist, I guess, or soloist, gives me a bit of freedom because I don't have the whole Russian piano school behind me as some of the Russians do.

[00:26:42.080] - Speaker 1
I don't have the French piano school to worry about. There is no piano school.

[00:26:49.270] - Speaker 2
Do you surprise yourself when you're playing?

[00:26:53.610] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Sometimes you have these moments where you're just observing it from you. I guess you could call it, I don't want to say it, but almost you go out of yourself. I'm not going to say out of body experience because you're very much in the act of doing it. But sometimes it's almost as if you zone up a few meters and you just observe it. When you fly, I think so many people who do this know that feeling, and it's thankfully rare because it then means something when it happens. But there can be also just these moments when the music also takes you in a difficult direction yourself in your own thought process with your memory and your own past experiences, and sometimes gross tragedies. Sometimes when I play parts of the Goldberg variations, I feel like getting a glimpse to what it must feel like to be at the end of your life. Sometimes it brings back pain from my past, of course. I think we all go through that on stage one way or another, if we are sincere enough about it and open up to it. But the Goldberg variation variations, they can so easily be read like a life cycle, if you wish.

[00:28:20.310] - Speaker 1
You can also completely oppose that. But you can see them as the beautiful aria, which is like, owed to life, birth of something magnificent, precious, fragile. Then you have the first 14 variations, which all have one thing in common. They just use the same chord structure as the aria, just this beautiful, simple G major structure. There are 14 different faces in a happy childhood that doesn't know shadow, it doesn't know pain. Then variation 15, quite deep into the piece, hits you in G minor, and he goes into the negative. Light becomes shadow. We have this unbearable suffering, and it's a little bit like in life, when we first encounter that, when we first encounter human loss, someone in our family, whatever that is, different for each and every one of us. Nothing prepares you for it. It can feel very much like that in the Goldberg Variations, Variations 15, just exactly in the middle of the piece. Then you have a break, and Variations 16 is an overture, like the beginning of something new again, and we have to bounce back. But we are different. We've gone through that tragedy once. Then you have the same thing happening in '21 and '25.

[00:29:40.420] - Speaker 1
Really in variation '25, he does something that is so magnificent that really hard to justify talking about it almost. But he expands time in a way that he zones in on the courts, and what is usually a two-minute variation turns into something like a 10-minute variation. He goes into the most excruciatingly painful chromatic musical language. He goes to the brink of what you can express and how much you can open up that compartment in your soul. It's a dark compartment. It's so painful. I think about Bach, and I think about the fact that he had lost 10 out of 20 children, I think, at this point. He had lost his first wife. I think she was giving birth. He had had so much difficulty in a way, modest success. There he was, I think, history's greatest, not just musician, but perhaps just artist. I don't know if anyone can really match this. He's all alone, but he bounces back and variation 26, 7, 8, 9, 30. You go in a flurry and you go back and you hold on to it and it becomes this celebration and this, I am going to emerge from this victorious no matter what, like we think in life.

[00:31:04.310] - Speaker 1
But then the surprising thing happens in the master stroke, where he brings the aria back, and it's the exact same notes as in the beginning, but they've taken on a completely different meaning. Those same chords structures now reflect those 30 different periods in our life, these 30 different chapters. When this piece comes to an end, that's actually, it's strange to say because we are just in G major, and it's just goes into the sunset. But it is one of the most tragic moments I know in all of music. It's tragic on a personal level because you don't want the music to end, you don't want that aria to end. You want to hold on to it just like you want to hold on to life. You have the feeling when the aria comes back, that it's just on the mixer board and you're taking it down, and then you're like, It's been playing. They're all along. It's eternal. It is the foundation of the world in this piece. You feel your own end is coming, but the aria will on. No. Just like life goes on, but we do not go on. That's how it can very often feel when you're playing.

[00:32:09.180] - Speaker 1
You go to that place in yourself, you go to that place of personal experience. It's strange things to do with music that somebody else wrote. But while you're in the act of playing the Goldberg Variations, you merge with them in a way that you become them. I think when you play King Lear, you become Lear.

[00:32:25.920] - Speaker 2
The audience gets to experience just like you do. It's like the powers in the music.

[00:32:31.520] - Speaker 1
Yeah, it's incredible. You have all these people in the room. Paradoxically, they are absolutely communal together in a collective, and it's the most beautiful thing in human brother and sisterhood, you can imagine. At the same time, it's the most individualistic thing in the world because everyone is in their own place, and they're all very often somewhere in their own life story. And Bach reflects that very easily in this piece and in much of music. He invites you to discover yourself. When you play Beethoven, whom I love almost equally, you're a guest in his world, and he invites you to explore different facets of him. But Bach, he becomes your mirror. But it's that thing at the end of the Goldberg Variation, when people... Everybody wants to hold on to it, which is why the silence is tragic.

[00:33:28.890] - Speaker 2
Did you feel obligated to get into the Goldberg Variations, to record it and to play it? It's a funny thing because it's such a monumental piece, and it means so much. But there are a lot of great pieces. Tell me about the decision to do it, why you chose to do it, why you chose to do it, when you chose to do it, and did you feel any sense of obligation?

[00:33:52.840] - Speaker 1
It's a big question. To give an honest answer to it, you have to go back quite a few years. When I first heard this music, it changed the way I thought about not just Bach, but about all music and about recordings. And I think I was 14. I heard the recording of Glenn Gould on Columbia. The early or the late? The early one first. And I just remember my head and my heart exploding. I was 14. It's a great year to hear the Goldberg Variations for the first time. It's just the right time, I think. Up until that point, I had played a lot of Bach, but he was used in my musical upbringing very much to teach good musical manners, how to play even rhythm, control everything, not too much pedal, know how to do this trick here and that drill there, and blah, blah, blah. Bach was all about... It was complex music. It was mathematical. It was structural. It wasn't poetic yet to me. Just that connection hadn't been made in my head. Then I heard the Goldberg variations, Gullt, and I realized that indeed, he is a free country, and that he can be so many things at the same time.

[00:35:19.140] - Speaker 1
Sure, he can be strict, he can be academic, and he can be your stern teacher. That's fine. But he can also be an entertainer. He can just be a who's almost like a carefree virtuoso who wants to just thrill you with his skill. He can be the deep, most tragic poet, and he can be the most brilliant philosopher, and he can be all those things in one piece and almost at the same time. It's unreal when you just realize that these structures are poems, and that they so easily can reflect the human condition in me and you. That happened when I was 14 with the Goldberg variation and I started to learn them, and I didn't play them in public until 16 years later, when I was 30. It was out of respect. I just knew that I wasn't ready with them. I played a lot of other Bach, but not the Goldberg Variations in public. Played them when I was 30. And it became a calling card. My career really started in my early 30s, and this was a really important piece, the piece that Universal Budget Grammars one heard me play in a tiny little concert in Berlin, et cetera.

[00:36:27.940] - Speaker 1
Really? It started that whole chapter in my life, or those chapters, I should say. But then I took a break from it because something about this piece, the fact that I see it as, it sounds childish, but I think of it as the greatest keyboard work of all time and perhaps the greatest musical work I know of all time. Yes. Because of that burden of association, it almost becomes a trial where you are the prosecutor and the judge and the defendant. You put yourself on the line with the Goldberg Variations. I thought, I want to do something special for my 40th birthday year, and I want to take a break from the big industry, all the symphony orchestras and this normal seasons. I just want to be alone with my suitcase with Bach, with myself, with the studio, with my family, but take a break from it. Play this one piece on a pilgrimit, just like a workaholic's year off, workaholic's sabbatical, playing 100 concerts. But that's how I it. I thought, now I will record it. I'll face my trial. I'll see where I stand with this material. But once you have recorded it and started the tour, of course, you change your mind infinitely many times about how the music should actually go.

[00:37:44.930] - Speaker 1
I'm actually thinking about jumping into the studio at the end of the tour now in June and just recording them again.Yes.

[00:37:52.240] - Speaker 2
Great idea.Why not?Great idea.I.

[00:37:55.260] - Speaker 1
Know they will be different.For sure.

[00:37:57.820] - Speaker 2
They can't help it to be different.

[00:37:59.330] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Maybe you should just come to Iceland then and be a part of that.

[00:38:05.740] - Speaker 2
That sounds like that's a good reason to come to Iceland.

[00:38:08.270] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I could see it. We can have fun with microphones together.

[00:38:11.170] - Speaker 2
How far in advance did you decide 40 years old, Goldberg Variations. Did it happen quickly or over years had you been thinking about it?

[00:38:25.470] - Speaker 1
I was thinking about it over the years and leading to this point in time for, I would say, five years. I've been talking about this privately to my team for five years. I love thinking in those kinds of blocks and trying to understand the different chapters of my own life, even if we can't. But I think it's important to at least show interest in the different chapters and not just do things on automatic. I've been thinking about turning 40 and looking around in my profession of music, but of classical music. I see very often, and also in in any music, actually. You see so often people have these creative periods, very often in the '20s and sometimes in the '30s. Yes. Beyond '40, it certainly happens, and you can see incredible creative growth after 40, but very often, it's not the case. Very often people settle into a mode of themselves where they have defined themselves, perhaps too much, and they don't challenge that definition. Likelifestyles become slightly nicer. That's the key. Everything becomes a little bit more luxurious. Big bands sign contracts not to go too far away from proven success. It's a deal with the devil.

[00:39:45.490] - Speaker 1
But I think about this all the time, and I think about it, how many composers, performers, bands, musicians, colleagues, do I see that I really look up to in a creative sense in this early middle age, if we call it like that? How many people manage that? Because I think the tendency is that you could just become like a luxury handbag, like a Gucci that's being sold by managers to promoters, and everybody is very happy about it because the leather is so fine and the seams are so seamless. It's a gorgeous little thing, but it's a handbag. It doesn't...

[00:40:22.260] - Speaker 2
And the bag is empty.

[00:40:23.370] - Speaker 1
The bag is empty. Exactly. I think the artists that we all loved are the ideological artists, people like... In my realm, people like Glenn Gould. There's no one greater in that sense from defining the performer's creative, and sometimes compositional, basically, role in music. The composer sense, certainly, of course, you Sebastian Bach, but also Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, who was a late bloomer and not very much a prodigy in my mind. You have people like Igor Stravinsky, you have Ludwig von Beethoven, who seems to, with every work, challenge the his whole musical worldview. Can we do that in 2024? I don't know, but I think we have to push in that direction.

[00:41:08.120] - Speaker 2
I think it's definitely possible. I think part of it has to do with dedication. One of the things that I see with artists as they get more successful and grow up, their life becomes more complicated, and music is no longer the most important thing in their lives. It's a thing they do full-time men, but their home life. It makes sense. You want your home life to be fruitful and important and the center of your life. But that's also at the expense of the obsession with the work that you had when you were younger. But I think wisdom comes through experience, and there's an energy in youth that can't be recreated. But there's something that comes from wisdom that's, I'll say, equally magnificent, it's just different. But I think also the dedication aspect of it is absolutely key. If you don't treat it as the most important thing, it won't be and it will diminish.

[00:42:14.630] - Speaker 1
Yes. Maybe it's okay to have a nice home, but so many other things you can get rid of. Yeah.

[00:42:24.570] - Speaker 2
To know that when you're doing music, you're really doing music. You You're not one foot is in home and one foot is in the music, and you really can be there when you're there. It's really about being present, being in the moment.

[00:42:40.740] - Speaker 1
Getting rid of your smartphone, I think, as well. Good idea. It's a hard thing to do. I'm trying to think about my next 10 years from 40 to 50, what should happen, what I want to do. I keep going back to my beginning to composing music, to opening up to the… I've done some of that, of course, but I used to do quite a lot of that when I was just a kid. But that's perhaps why I turned so much to Bach as well, because I feel that it's like a compositional outlet in the comfort zone of somebody else's notes. It's a protected environment.

[00:43:30.990] - Speaker 2
How do you think composing impacts your playing?

[00:43:35.860] - Speaker 1
I think from composing, which is a scary thing to do because you have an empty page and everybody knows that. I think when you have to make that journey from point A to point B to C, you then start to think differently about the music of other people that you play, and you start to automatically deconstruct it and think about how it might fantasize, how it might have been written, which is a fantastic thing. When you look at, for instance, Beethoven sketches, and you see some of his processes, they're so clumsy at the beginning. He starts with these super clumsy ideas, and then he just works and works and works and works until he's happy with what he's doing. Sometimes I like that, to decompose the music and try to imagine, what if I don't know the next note or the Goldberg variations? What note should come next. Then that note, of course, takes on an added significance once you then play it and understand it in that context, as opposed to recreate what have you heard in a recording from Glenn Gould when you were 14. That's a very important part of looking at it from my perspective.

[00:44:45.090] - Speaker 1
But there are different schools of thought about that. Many people in classical music, they think it's almost frivolous to allow yourself that perspective and to almost think and feel almost like a composer when you're working in the music of others, because they think, and there was a very 20th century the idea that the performer in classical music is a humble, dedicated servant to the great master, the composer who died 100 years ago. But I think to those people, I say, Have you tried working with living composers and some of the best living composers in the world because they changed their minds about tempos, about narratives, about notes, about everything. Of course, they do from day to day. It's none. Working with a living composer certainly makes the dead composer much more flexible. I think it's a beautiful thing then to open the Bach Goldberg Variations or Beethoven and Sonatas, having just come from a session with John Adams or whomever, Philip Glass or something. I think my favorite performers in history, many of them died before 1950, because at that point in history, in the early 20th century, and certainly in the 19th century, the performer was almost a composer as well.

[00:45:55.020] - Speaker 1
That was just part of your musical foundation. You wrote music, and then you could become a famous pianist by playing the music of others. When Rachmaninov plays the music of Chopin, it's the most authentic Chopin playing I know, and it's certainly my favorite. Sometimes he takes things and turns them upside down, and a forte becomes a piano, so loud becomes soft. He really takes a lot of beautiful compositional liberty. He makes the music his own. It really becomes a meeting and a dialog between Sergi Rachmaninov, the pianist, and Schopen, the composer. But it's so authentic. Look at Vladimir Horowitz. At the end of his life, he said he had one regret, which was not to have composed more because he always played the piano like a composer. That's what people forget. Not just like a great virtuoso. He played like a composer. That's, I think, what so many of the really big communicators in classical music, I'd rather call them almost communicators than performers, because performer is such a boring word. Communicator is, I think, more what it's about. Why they've so often had that this dimension of the composer's perspective.

[00:47:04.870] - Speaker 2
Would you say the composer brings something less technical to the picture? Is the pianist the technical adapt?

[00:47:15.570] - Speaker 1
Like the craftsman, you mean? Yeah. I think the composer goes beyond that because composers don't care about the craftsmanship of playing an instrument most of the time when they're in the act of writing. Of course, you have to write in such a it's possible to play it. But yeah, you go beyond that. You go beyond the act of executing a skill to the source of inspiration and the root of the music, perhaps. Yeah, I'd say so.

[00:47:49.550] - Speaker 2
Tell me a little bit about the history of recorded classical music.

[00:47:54.120] - Speaker 1
Wow, it's... I should have prepared before I came here. All right. Let me masterclass you on this.

[00:48:02.670] - Speaker 2
As you know it, walk me through.

[00:48:05.120] - Speaker 1
Well, it starts with Vox silenters, doesn't it? But I think there's a general attitude in the beginning, in the late Deutsche Grammophon My record label is actually, I believe, the oldest record label in the world.

[00:48:19.160] - Speaker 2
I believe it is.

[00:48:19.930] - Speaker 1
How old is it now? Well, it keeps getting older, doesn't it? But it's...

[00:48:23.620] - Speaker 2
128 years, something like this, a lot.

[00:48:26.160] - Speaker 1
It's something like that. 0.5, probably. They're always counting. But it's in any case, I think it's maybe 1898. That's going to be my guess. But really at the tail end of the 19th century. It's beautiful to listen to those recordings. It's almost like shouting like, Can you hear me? There's so much noise. It's just like you're in the middle of some disaster. But during that disaster, someone Everyone is making music, and it's a fascinating thing. But relatively quickly, of course, things became more advanced, and we really start to see classical recordings that we can actually listen to, I'd say already in the 1920s, that I have many records from that time. The problem with recording for so many decades of recording was that the performers were afraid of the microphones. They hated the microphones, and they saw it as almost like a duty like paying taxes. That you have to do it, but you don't enjoy doing it. I think very often, they felt slightly inhibited and afraid of errors and mistakes and wrong notes and scratches and whatever. I think for the longest time, there was a an apprehension, a lack of trust.

[00:49:56.100] - Speaker 2
Do you think it's because in that case, the performance lives versus the temporal nature of doing a concert and tomorrow, that music from last night is over and now you get to do it again?

[00:50:08.500] - Speaker 1
I think so. I think it's because it's a very comparative art form that you're using the same text from night to night, from pianist to pianist. It's very interesting. How is my Chopin minute walls going to compare to that person's recording of the same piece? I don't like comparison in art like that. I think it's actually the enemy of art, but it's inevitable when you're having the same score, especially when you're committing it to a record. Yeah, I think the moment when this changed was actually going back to our 1955 encounter with Glenn Gould in the Goldberg Variations, when 22-year-old Glenn Gould takes this piece that was absolutely outside of the performed Rapper tour. Nobody took that piece seriously as a concert piece. It was just seen as almost like a philosophical statement by Bach rather than the work that it actually is. Do you know how many times he recorded the opening aria of the Goldberg Variations, a piece that is not... You're not going to play so many wrong notes in it, are you? I can't remember. It was 19 or 21 takes of the aria. He doesn't even do the repeats. The piece is two or three minutes long.

[00:51:12.100] - Speaker 1
It's a serene aria, but it's a change of direction in the way we see the studio and embrace the possibility of that art form and define it as its own art form as opposed to a byproduct and something you have to do on the side of playing concerts.

[00:51:29.340] - Speaker 2
Did he ever talk about that? Did he ever talk about the thought process?

[00:51:33.890] - Speaker 1
I'm not sure. He loved to talk about the studio, but he always scripted himself.

[00:51:40.600] - Speaker 2
I just wonder if he was listening maybe to jazz records or things that would inspire him to do what he did.

[00:51:46.390] - Speaker 1
How did he come up with it? It's a wonderful thing. I mean, to just... Because it's not about hitting the right note. It's a statement about idealism of the studio and to dare to go for your ideal in that sense, to have the courage.

[00:52:00.830] - Speaker 2
Yeah, it's not purely a document of one moment.

[00:52:03.650] - Speaker 1
No.

[00:52:04.990] - Speaker 2
You can go as long as you need to go until you get the thing you want to get.

[00:52:08.900] - Speaker 1
Yeah, it's a creative process of the studio that you and I love, I think.

[00:52:13.350] - Speaker 2
But probably before that, you believe people just came in, did their thing, were intimidated by the mic, and that was it, and that's all we had.

[00:52:20.540] - Speaker 1
I think so. It was also because the editing possibilities became so vastly better in the 1950s and maybe slightly earlier. But really, that's a turning point in time. So this cold hand goes hand in hand. But I think so many people like Rachmaninoff, and even if his recordings are unbelievably gorgeous, I think he suffered a little bit in the studio. We're like, I'll play this three times now, and hopefully one take will be both glorious from a technical perspective and unbelievably inspired from a musical perspective. It's just hard to get one take of everything you want when you're trying to match your ideal in every millisecond mic a second of the performance. But I mean, how to talk about the 20th century? I mean, I think this is a real turning point. Then I think we have a a glorious period when you're recording almost anything. If you're with the right label and with the right promoter, it just turns into gold. You could record almost anything in the '17s and '80s and release it on Deutsche Grammophon. It would just sell. People were just doing these big symphonic cycles and one after the other and all the Wagner operas, and these huge, huge releases.

[00:53:39.640] - Speaker 1
Such a glorious time in a sense. But in another sense, it's also a rather automatic time from an A&R perspective, because I think the way people thought about recordings was a little bit like going to the library. You go into the alphabet, you find this author, and then you find all his works, and there they are, and they're presented like that. If you're going to record the Chopin Nocturns, then you record all those nocturns, and you always release them from Nocturn One to the nocturn, the last Nocturn, and that's how you do it. If you're going to do all the Bach inventions, these 15 inventions, you have to then do an album that's just the inventions. But people wouldn't shuffle. They wouldn't look for unexpected context. They wouldn't see music history as that a playground. That's a much more recent idea that started more in the '90s, and then it's been a wonderful period for that in the 21st century because we've done all the catalog. At this point, how many people are actually waiting for the next 32 Beethoven and pianos and other cycles to be released? I'm not saying you shouldn't do that.

[00:54:39.070] - Speaker 2
But we're looking for the moments. We're looking for magic moments and the idea of combining the work of composers that are sympathetic, where you learn something new about one composer by what you play next to him.

[00:54:55.240] - Speaker 1
I had a discussion with a wonderful musical friend in Iceland who was talking about Shuffle and how much she loves to wake up and just open one of those streaming platforms and just start one track that she wants to listen to and then just see what the hell happens and allow that to become your day in one way. It's like to take four or five random tracks. I think sometimes Shuffle is the most wonderful thing about modern day listening that you go into such unexpected encounters and you put music history in such new context. We forget that's a recent thing. People did not do that in the '90s, unless we have a really good DJ. But certainly, I think the way I've done my albums, certainly for Deutsche Grammophon, has been It's like playlists that I spend a year or two just forming before I even start to work on learning the notes. I have many playlists in my private corner here, which experimenting with. One of those was Debussy Ramo, where I made Debussy that everybody thinks is the great impressionist among composers, which is the most superficial thing you can say, because he hated that term, by the way.

[00:56:13.010] - Speaker 1
But Debussy's roots were really in the French baroque. I focus on the baroque side of Debussy, and then I put him right next to Jean-Philippe Ramot, who was the Anfan Terrible, I think, of the French baroque. I focused on the futuristic and visionary side of Ramot, and I put them in the same room together basically 200 years apart. They're having a dialog on that album. My point was that you hardly know who's who. Ramo in 1760s write music that is so touching and futuristic that it It would have been written by Gustave Mahler at the end of the 19th century. And Debussy, with all of his unbelievable spacious harmonic inventions and everything that he brings new, he has that foundation of the baroque, of the toccata, of motoric driving structure. I think very often we simplify history a little bit.

[00:57:11.520] - Speaker 2
How much earlier was Rameau?

[00:57:13.990] - Speaker 1
Rameau was born two years before Bach, so 1683. So basically, yeah, they're far apart.

[00:57:23.830] - Speaker 2
That's interesting.

[00:57:25.240] - Speaker 1
1683. I think they're born about 180 years apart, but 180 years is nothing. The older I get, now I'm 40. I actually think 180 years isn't so much. I look back at Bach and I look back at Julius Caesar, or Jesus Christ or something. Actually, it just seems a few grandmothers away. Yeah. You know? Yeah.

[00:57:50.010] - Speaker 2
Do you think how much music has changed over the 40 years you've been alive?

[00:57:55.310] - Speaker 1
Intense.

[00:57:56.260] - Speaker 2
So if you now add-Intense?

[00:57:59.000] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[00:57:59.300] - Speaker 2
It's hard to understand 180 years in music is a long time.

[00:58:04.140] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Is it, though? I mean, sometimes I love folk songs, not cheesy, stupid folk songs, but I love folk songs about death and about serious matters. Fox songs about hunger. We have lots of those in Iceland for some reason. What I like about folk songs is that they can't be composed by an individual, but they are the collective effort of generations of a grandmother singing to her grandchild who then sings to their grandchild. Something about these melodies makes me feel time in a strangely compressed way. You feel like the essence of maybe three or four centuries. All of a sudden, they just become like this, which is how our lives are in blink of an eye in relation to the age of the world, the age of Earth. No, I Actually, I don't think that 180 years is a long time, even in music. But think about all the music that we don't know. Sometimes we think that people just started hitting sticks, but what the hell do we know about what people were doing their 20,000 years ago? We don't know. Why do we think they were so primitive? I don't think so. I don't think we can prove anything.

[00:59:21.660] - Speaker 1
No. Imagine what if they were singing these unbelievable sounds together, just polyphonic calls to warn off danger. I mean, We have no way of knowing. Yeah.

[00:59:34.040] - Speaker 2
How many pieces did Bach write? Loads.

[00:59:38.150] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I mean, there's 1,100 opus almost, or they have different names, but the opus is All of them are recorded and made popular or no? No, but they're all pretty good. I mean, they're all basically poems. That's a strange thing about him. Something about the structural and side of Bach that opens. Maybe we see them as poems because we reflect our own ideas onto the music as well. But I think about him, and I think about the fact that he had no audience. He wrote this music like Goldberg Variations for nobody. You know who Goldberg was? 14-year-old kid. Really? Yeah. He wasn't the guy who paid for the variations. Goldberg I think Johann Gottlieb Goldberg, I think I'm saying this, correct? He was a 14-year-old, very gifted student of Bach's, hapsichordist or instrumentalist. The Goldberg Variations were written for a guy who's his name was Kaiserlink. He was a count, an aristocratic man, some a diplomat, I think, who had insomnia, I couldn't fall asleep. He commissioned Bach to write him variations to with his sleepless night. This little Goldberg, as the story goes, had to take a room next to the count, and whenever the count would grow, like, I can't sleep, he would play the music.

[01:01:11.550] - Speaker 1
He would play me Variations XIII or whatever. Wow. Poor little 14-year-old Goldberg would have to go there and during the night play this for the count to fall asleep. But I think I love the story on many levels, but what I really love about it is that the variations are not called the Kaiserlink Variations, which would be a horrible name anyway, but they're called the Goldberg Variations because they are the performers' piece. You have to take ownership of it. They become Goldbergs rather than Kaiserlings. But think about it, Bach is there, and he only has four books of music published in his whole lifetime. I think I'm saying this correctly. Meanwhile, you have the big superstar and almost equally wonderful composer, Handel, Georg Friedrich Handel. Living in London I think the biggest name in music, the Taylor Swift of his time or whatever. Basically, having that glorious show business life that Bach never had. Bach was always stuck in Leipzig. I think he was third choice to become the organist of that Thomas Church. People really didn't know who was there. He knew who was there, but people didn't. He had to do so many things.

[01:02:26.610] - Speaker 1
He had to teach Latin, he had to teach violin, hapsichord, conduct the choir, blah, blah, blah. He had to do a million things. Then he also had to write a big cantata, a piece for a choir and a little orchestra, sometimes every one, every week for every Sunday, and write out all these parts, and I just can't understand. The man who had 20 children and 10 of them died, and just the drama of this guy. Meanwhile, from the 21st century perspective, it's It's, to me, impossible to understand just from a human ego perspective. There you are. You are that creator. You are that musician. You're Johann Sebastian Bach. You're that man in history. How lonely must it feel to write the Goldberg Variations for a 14-year-old kid and a guy who wants to fall asleep. Can we even comprehend that? The fact that he writes it not so far away from the end of his own life, and he had nine more years to live, and his health was starting to deteriorate. Old music didn't exist as performing music. You wouldn't have concert music with anything that was written older than one or two years, mostly something that was written for the occasion.

[01:03:41.420] - Speaker 1
It was just all new music. There you are. You have created these, whatever, 1,100 pieces or more indeed. They're of that level. You're at the end of your life and you have no idea whether anyone will ever know anything about this. Yeah. Well, if we just take it on a human level, of course, our own lives, however famous we might become during our lifetimes, they're a bit like this because we're all going to be forgotten in just a few years. But how does it feel still for Bach to look around and to see the success and the Fame of perhaps lesser composers? Well, he writes at the end of every score, S-D-G, soli, deo, gloria, glory to God. It was a ritual, a religious thing for him, too. I think he was a very devout Christian, but I also think he needed that even more because of what he was creating for no audience.

[01:04:41.760] - Speaker 2
This piece, the Goldberg, where he- Obviously, he was creating it for an audience because of what I wrote at the end. It was devotional.

[01:04:47.000] - Speaker 1
Yeah, that's right. But I just sometimes think you spoke about the modernity of this and about Bach. And I think that it's a letter to the future. It's a letter that he actually puts in a bottle and he floats it on the ocean, and it finds us all these years later. And I was talking with John Adams. We were, by coincidence, in Barcelona together in November. And John, from a very composer's perspective, he said to me, How many times are you playing the Goldberg Variations this year? I was like, 96 times or whatever it is. Then John just looked at me and said, I just wish Bach got some of the royalties. I I love that, right? But he's right. I just think if Johan, Sebastian, and Bach knew what role his music plays in the lives of people in the year 2024, Yeah. I was just discussing with my friends at Universal Music. I think Bach is the biggest composer on the streaming platforms. But there's a reason for it. It's because his music works equally well, almost, whether you go into very deep, intense is listening to only that. But the incredible thing about the structure of Bach is that it also allows you to do something else and elevate the environment, meanwhile.

[01:06:11.700] - Speaker 1
Then you can zone back in and you can get so much from it, but somehow it gives you freedom to lead your life in another direction and still have him be a part of it. I think that is key to him, but I often think about him and I feel brotherhood with him, and I feel for him.

[01:06:34.910] - Speaker 2
Hearing the story about Glenn Gould at 22, finding the Goldberg Variations, a more obscure work, and it becoming the Goldberg variations that we think of as the mountaintop. If there is as much Bach material as there is, might you find your mountaintop in that music that becomes the twin mountaintop that doesn't yet exist.

[01:07:05.600] - Speaker 1
The second Goldberg variations?

[01:07:07.040] - Speaker 2
Well, it's not the second Goldberg variations, but- I know what you mean.

[01:07:10.020] - Speaker 1
Do you know what I'm- To find something like that.

[01:07:11.460] - Speaker 2
Can you find what of importance is unheard in boxwork, and can you create the performance of it that sets the standard of this is one of the great works of all time?

[01:07:28.980] - Speaker 1
It's a dangerous thought because if you go there, I think my early middle-age ego takes over and you start to define yourself and hope for your place in the canon like all white men think about at some point in their lives.

[01:07:43.680] - Speaker 2
I'm saying it as For Bach, though, not for you.

[01:07:47.650] - Speaker 1
Are you thinking for him that he could?

[01:07:49.680] - Speaker 2
No, I'm saying if you do that, that's the greatest gift you can give to Bach.

[01:07:56.390] - Speaker 1
Basically, I think you can do it, but you can only do it. What I'm trying to say is you can only do it by not thinking like that, because once you think like that in such a canonical way, I think your subconsciousness and your creativity is going to get stifled.

[01:08:11.810] - Speaker 2
Yes, it can be undermined.

[01:08:13.230] - Speaker 1
I'm actually convinced about that.

[01:08:14.970] - Speaker 2
It's too big of a goal.

[01:08:16.580] - Speaker 1
Yeah, because that's the mind frame of the young man, I think, or the young woman, the young artist. They want to go there in history, and you want to... That's why it's impossible to do the Goldberg Variations, and they are waited until it was 40 because it becomes that trial. But it's nice to have done it once so you can do it again and then forget about the trial. But yeah, I think it's absolutely possible to redefine this work. But while you're doing it, you're probably more aware of other things than the fact you're doing it. You're probably deeper into the music than that. But it's a very interesting thought, actually.

[01:08:53.140] - Speaker 2
Again, I'm not thinking of it in terms of the canon or in terms of competition. I'm thinking it in terms of the legacy of Bach.

[01:09:01.760] - Speaker 1
Absolutely.

[01:09:02.460] - Speaker 2
The fact that if there are lost beautiful moments that the only reason that people don't know them is because no one is shining light on them.

[01:09:12.110] - Speaker 1
But for sure, there's a lot of those things because- Has to be. Absolutely. Has to be. Absolutely.

[01:09:18.660] - Speaker 2
I never would have had this thought if you didn't tell me the story of Glenn Gould doing the work, and it wasn't the position that we think of it now.

[01:09:26.560] - Speaker 1
I know. I completely agree. But I think that basically when you play the Goldberg variations, when I recorded them, I felt like the ink had just dried on the page. I felt the music was so new to me. How do other people feel about it? I don't really care. But that's how it was in my mind. If that is your feeling, you can hope that more people might feel like that, or they might not. But that's a good feeling to have for yourself. It's a good point in the creative process to find yourself in. But yeah, it does feel like new music in a very strange sense that the music of Mozart doesn't feel, even if it's unbelievably beautiful and it deserves-I don't have the same connection to Mozart.

[01:10:12.900] - Speaker 2
I never have had the same connection to Mozart.

[01:10:15.850] - Speaker 1
Well, I'll play you some Mozart later. I'll try to convert you there. But it's a different thing. He's not perhaps a part of our time quite in the same way that Bach becomes a part of our time. He's not the same mirror But it's about also the idea of writing those kinds of structures as opposed to going more into the classical romantic period when the narrative is perhaps more defined by the composer.

[01:10:39.050] - Speaker 2
It sounds more like a time, whereas Bach sounds more... It's like math. Math is an older knew. When you see the equations, they just are. That's how Bach strikes me. Yeah.

[01:10:53.550] - Speaker 1
East is the future.

[01:10:55.500] - Speaker 2
How did you choose Glass to start with? Your first with Deutsche Grammophon is Philip Glass?

[01:11:04.050] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Do you know Philip? I've never met him.

[01:11:06.390] - Speaker 2
I'm a fan, obviously, from a distance.

[01:11:09.120] - Speaker 1
Yeah. He's a wonderful man. I know him, but I knew him more back in those days. But he did invite me to perform with him on numerous occasions. I played with him, joint concerts with more young pianists in London, in Sweden, actually in Reykjavik, Iceland. I played Yeah. Well, the piano etudes were the ones I really like and connected to, not all of them. There's a piece called the opening for that album, which was released five days before Philip's 80th birthday. It was a rather extravagant, I thought, birthday present.Beautiful. To him. That was back in 2017. I recorded in 2016. I like the idea of an offbeat entry into that oldest record label in the world. Yeah. I was already two years old at the time, so I wasn't exactly that young. If I would have been 22 or 20 or 18 or 16, I probably would have really pushed for the Goldberg variations or the Schopenhains or whatever, something like how people are supposed to do it. But I guess I was old enough to favor a more offbeat and perhaps slightly riskier choice. But I really felt with that music that I didn't agree with the recordings that were on the market.

[01:12:31.270] - Speaker 1
I simply didn't understand them. The music spoke very directly to me, but it also spoke to me in a somewhat compositional sense. Working with Philip was very free because I played the music so completely differently from him Yes. I remember I played for him, Etude number 6, which is very fast, repeated, nervous etchet, repeated notes and this beautiful, a little almost Rachmaninoff feel to it. I it probably 50% faster than his own recording or whatever. I play it much faster. He said to me, Somebody should give you a speeding ticket, but it's not going to be me, which was beautiful and generous. He was saying, Basically, you shouldn't play it that fast, but I like it. I think that's what he was saying. He was allowing me to be me inside the music, which is great. But he's also a performer, so he understands that you have to have that freedom to express something in music with that the whole thing of minimalism, so-called, and let's call it music based on repetitive structures where you have one chord, and then that measure repeats four, eight times a little sequence, and then the next sequence that repeats four times, then you go back to sequence A and repeat that two times or whatever.

[01:13:48.030] - Speaker 1
The more I started to play that, the more it freed me a little bit from the conventional narrative of going from point A to B to C and how you see the narrative of traditional piece of music or of a movie or of a book, just a storyline. He doesn't go into stories like that. He creates space with these structures. The more I started to look and play this music, the more I realized that there is no such thing as repetition. It doesn't exist in music, and it doesn't exist in life. It's not a matter of playing these patterns twice the same, but rather to find a new perspective on them and to allow time to pass and to allow them to evolve. It's more like a painter who's working perhaps with the same subject matter, but always finding ever new perspective. That changed very much the way I saw it. Then it became a very interesting, for me, playground of exploring sometimes the essence of ideas. These etudes, some of them are very simple, some of them are less simple, but he's very often exploring one-chord relationship, two-chords, and how they relate to one another, or he's exploring how you play three notes against two in a polyrhythm, or three against four, whatever it is.

[01:15:06.850] - Speaker 1
But he's taking these musical elements and he's zooming in on them and giving us the essence of those elements. I started to really enjoy this because it became an exploration of, well, those musical ideas, but also of space, of the acoustic, of the instrument, of the color, of the pedal. The pedal of the piano is not something you just press down. It has so many different variations inside and how much you lift the dampers, how you work with sound. It became an exploration and agents in musicality and in improvisation, almost. I would go on stage with those agents and I'd just play them as Completely differently. I'd really sometimes build a narrative just using those structures almost like they were just my ingredients. When people listen to those recordings and then they look at the score, they're like, What the hell is he doing? Some people hated me for it, but others didn't. But they're like, I'm not following almost any of the dynamics. Sorry, Philip. I'm not following any of the tempo markings. I'm not doing almost any of the things that he writes in there because I didn't relate to the music using them.

[01:16:21.320] - Speaker 1
But I related so strongly to the music in a more abstract sense. I thought these structures and at their best are so phenomenally brilliant and beautiful and so generous. They allowed me a little bit to be myself. The thing is that he did allow me to be myself as well. At least, he never really told me off. I haven't seen him for years now. I hope he forgives me about speaking so openly about this. I love the man and I love the music. But that was an interesting thing. But I'll tell you something. When I started with DGI, and recorded this, I was always going to do then Bach as my second album because it's the passion of my life. But I had this interesting moment, and I want to share it with you, and I want to share it with any young artist who is perhaps starting out or finding their way. The success of the Glass album, and it was quite successful, almost became my enemy because there were very strong voices within my label, which I love my label, but at that point early in my collaboration with them, I thought I had earned my right to do whatever I wanted to do as a second album.

[01:17:37.600] - Speaker 1
But they said, No, because the album sold seven times more than we expected and got these reviews. We realized now that you are this fantastic pianist to play American minimalistic music. I just remember my heart sinking and I was just like, No, no, no, no, no, But many strong people at that point in the company wanted to place me in that context. So I was that guy for them.

[01:18:08.050] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[01:18:09.200] - Speaker 1
How long did that last? Well, I actually threatened to leave and break up my contract if I wouldn't get to do my second album the way I wanted to do it, the Bach album. And by that time, I decided to do something completely different from the Goldberg Variations. I was on a different rhythm there myself. And then when it really became, I'm leaving Leaving. I'll just do that album on Sony or whatever. Of course, I won that battle. Then it turned out that Bach, of course, the second album was, I mean, infinitely more successful than the first one. And then I had the same conversation. But then I was going to do a French album, and then they were like, Actually, because we see now that the Bach album is so phenomenal successful, we see that you're a Bach pianist. I was like, Well, yes. I actually I thought very early how dangerous it is to have such a strong machine tell you who you are, and almost every artist goes through that. Yes.

[01:19:09.590] - Speaker 2
It's a big part of my job as a producer is protecting them from those voices. Right. Seriously. Because there's something bigger at play than it worked last time, so let's do the same thing again. That's almost never the best idea.

[01:19:24.100] - Speaker 1
No.

[01:19:24.540] - Speaker 2
It's usually the worst idea. I remember the very first album I ever produced, rock album, was a group called The Cult from They played me some songs, and I'm like, This is going to be our first single. I said, Well, how do you know that? We haven't even recorded them yet. He's like, Well, it's got the same cords as our last single, and that was a hit. I said, Well, if it's got the same cords as the last single, it can't even be on the album. Oh, my God. It can't be the next single. It can't even be on the album. So depressing.

[01:19:51.950] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Oh, yeah. I almost get nervous from hearing something like that. You're like, Yeah, you're going to screw your career in life, and your music is just about to die. No, but I think that you have to, for the longest time, in a way, make sure you are always ahead of everybody else about who you are and where you're going. But you also have to escape a little bit success early on, at least, you have to, and maybe always, to move away.

[01:20:18.050] - Speaker 2
Well, you don't aim at it. You aim at what's good. Usually, the reason you become successful is because you're making something really good. If you focus on making something really good and continuing to make really good things, it usually works out.

[01:20:31.690] - Speaker 1
Can you imagine? It becomes this horrible Fast and the Furious 8 or Fast and the Furious 9 or whatever. I saw they are playing yesterday. I was like, They've actually gotten to what, 10 or something? What a horrible concept. It wasn't even good in the first place. But if you would imagine Beethoven writing the Fifth Symphony using the same chords. Oh, my God. It's very funny. Yeah. No, but I think at the same time, I just want to say I love my label. It's It really has become like a family to me.

[01:21:01.800] - Speaker 2
One of the things about Deutsche Grammophon that's so impressive is I don't know very much about classical music. I love listening to it, but I know very little. If I hear a piece of music I like and I want to go back to the past and find a great version of a piece, if I see the Deutsche Grammophon logo on anything, I know it's a good place to start. I don't know if it'll be the best version, but it will definitely be one of the best versions.

[01:21:27.490] - Speaker 1
There's something about it. This yellow label.

[01:21:30.700] - Speaker 2
Yeah, it's got great power. It has something. I think it's the only... Well, in a modern way, ECM also has this for me. Ecm records have a sound. I love them. They feel like they're not just part of everything else. I love that label. But I think those are the only two that I know of in the classical world where it really matters.

[01:21:51.980] - Speaker 1
Some people are going to cry at Sony right now or Warner. No, they're great people everywhere. Come on. There are great labels as well.

[01:22:00.400] - Speaker 2
Absolutely. But there's something about the history. There's something you can feel that history.

[01:22:05.270] - Speaker 1
Yeah, it is. Well, what surprised me when I came there first was how young the people are who are working there. You don't join them because of the history. You don't join them because of Horowitz or something like that. You don't do anything because of the past. You do it because of what's happening now in the present. But it does still have this aura.

[01:22:27.420] - Speaker 2
Oh, absolutely. It has this aura. It's in the same way that, yes, Carnegie Hall sounds great, but if there was another theater that sounded as good in New Jersey an hour away, it wouldn't be Carnegie Hall. There's something about the ghosts of these places. It's true.

[01:22:46.400] - Speaker 1
But didn't they do that? I think they tried to rebuild some of those houses somewhere in East Asia or something. I mean, or was it in Japan? I think they tried to take the Musikverein, this legendary hall in Vienna. I think they rebuilt it somewhere, and it sounds completely different, even if everything is the same. Well, thank God.

[01:23:03.650] - Speaker 2
No, it's magic. The reason I asked about Disney Hall is that's one of the concert halls that was built based on computer renderings. In recording studios, the ones built on computer renderings of what's best for sound don't necessarily sound as good as the old studios that were built with a different understanding of acoustics.

[01:23:26.140] - Speaker 1
But also wood and concrete and everything that goes into a house You can't escape time and you can't buy time, you can't skip time.

[01:23:34.370] - Speaker 2
No.

[01:23:35.220] - Speaker 1
Things change. The old pianos, the old violins, you can't buy it.

[01:23:41.730] - Speaker 2
Yes. I remember hearing that James Brown said he would only record in a studio that's on the ground floor. Oh, really? If the studio wasn't touching the ground, he didn't believe that the music could come through in the same way if you recorded it on another floor. Interesting.

[01:24:00.970] - Speaker 1
Probably right.

[01:24:02.360] - Speaker 2
It's interesting to consider. Wow.

[01:24:07.100] - Speaker 1
Yeah, took my mind away a little bit. Yeah, no, absolutely. I'm just thinking, I'm recording on the second floor. Shit.time for a new studio.Thinking if I was actually on the ground floor.

[01:24:17.010] - Speaker 2
Is the studio you're building going to be on the ground?

[01:24:19.970] - Speaker 1
Yeah, under my house with natural light flowing in from basically the grass is here and you have these windows, and then I've really gone deep.Oh, great.Yeah.

[01:24:29.940] - Speaker 2
It'sit's going to be beautiful. Maybe underground is even better. We don't know.

[01:24:33.000] - Speaker 1
That'll be a goodWe'll find out.We'll find out. We'll find out. I'm very excited about it. But it's also just... Yeah, it's the new chapter of changing the ratio in my life between the concert and the recording. I want to spend much more time with the microphone.

[01:24:49.690] - Speaker 2
Wayne, I suggested the Bach idea, and you said it was a dangerous idea. As soon as you said it was a dangerous idea, I knew it was a good idea. If the first word that comes to mind is dangerous, it's a good sign.It's a good sign.When making something.It's a good sign.If the idea is dangerous, it's worth looking at.

[01:25:08.460] - Speaker 1
I want to play you something. We spoke about it, but I don't think you know it.

[01:26:36.860] - Speaker 1
Where did you go with this?

[01:26:41.630] - Speaker 2
It took me away. It was very beautiful. What I was thinking about was what was going on in your head, and I was wondering, what's your internal conversation?

[01:26:50.840] - Speaker 1
What I wanted to play for you is music that was composed collectively. It's a folk song from Iceland.

[01:26:57.350] - Speaker 2
I love it.

[01:26:57.800] - Speaker 1
It's so beautiful. It is called Where Life and Death Made Well. Basically, the lyrics are the old farmer who's sowing seeds into the ground and contemplating with that when the seeds will have grown, he himself will be under that ground.Wow. It's so beautiful. This idea of folk songs being composed generation after generation after generation. The fact that in Iceland, it was such a dark place, in a difficult place, especially in those times, the fact that people would be singing, and the half the songs are about death, and the other half is about famine.It's fantastic.But there's something about the melody. Can't compose it. It's a thought process. But you're stuck and it goes back It is Out of time, in time and out of time.

[01:28:20.730] - Speaker 3
That's what I mean.

[01:28:46.840] - Speaker 1
Music that nobody knows. It's just a farmer somewhere in Iceland, sang this to his children, they sang it to their children. Then at some point in the 20th century, these people went from farm to farm to farm. It's really basic. I don't even know what recording equipment, but they recorded these farmers singing. These things, these 2,000 recordings of 2000 songs that exist there in the archives in Iceland. That's where this comes from.

[01:29:20.130] - Speaker 2
Yeah, I love it. Do you ever listen to the Gyrgifti Hartmann pieces?

[01:29:25.490] - Speaker 1
I don't really.

[01:29:26.560] - Speaker 2
I will play you some recordings, but what's interesting about it... Let me just play you a of something. Go ahead. Just to...

[01:29:33.800] - Speaker 1
I'll play some soothing chords while you're searching. Okay.

[01:29:44.870] - Speaker 2
Okay.

[01:31:31.220] - Speaker 3
You get the idea.

[01:31:43.910] - Speaker 1
But it's the same. It's the same idea of...

[01:31:55.110] - Speaker 2
It feels like this is rooted in old folk music. When I hear this, I hear old folk music.

[01:31:59.840] - Speaker 1
I I completely understand the association because you're stuck and you can't get out. You're stuck in the emotion and that's the power of it. That's amazing.

[01:32:12.450] - Speaker 2
It's one guy, Gurgif, is a spiritual teacher. Yes, I know. And Duhartmann is the composer who is his friend, and Griegif would sing the melodies to Duhartmann, and this is Duhartmann playing the melodies that were song to him.

[01:32:25.620] - Speaker 1
There's something about the way he plays.

[01:32:31.160] - Speaker 2
The drama.

[01:32:32.160] - Speaker 1
The drama and the... How should we say it? The freedom and the incorrectness of it because you can't place the notes. You can't calculate them and you don't know when they're going to hit. No, the timing. Because he's in the act of something else. He's not in that game. It's a different game. It's a good game. Yeah, but listen to this. I play this because of the birds. I don't know if you're going to hear that on the recording, but...

[01:33:28.260] - Speaker 2
I hope so.

[01:33:29.010] - Speaker 1
That's another folk song, not written, created, collectively, by Hungarian people. It's somewhere deep in, or I guess, Romania now. But that's the same thing.

[01:34:00.430] - Speaker 3
How unexpected, right?

[01:34:13.460] - Speaker 1
It's so far away from the structure. I love the structure.Of course.But that's why I sometimes go into this music to open up.

[01:34:26.280] - Speaker 2
I'm excited for your album of folk music as well. That's another It's back to the list.

[01:34:30.660] - Speaker 1
Yeah, right.

[01:34:31.910] - Speaker 2
At some point, I mean, now that you're 50/50, you're going to make more albums.

[01:34:35.300] - Speaker 1
Many more.

[01:34:36.030] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[01:34:37.270] - Speaker 1
It's true.

[01:34:39.620] - Speaker 3
I mean,

[01:35:25.690] - Speaker 3
Sometimes the Goldberg Variations, the opening of it.

[01:35:38.140] - Speaker 1
Sometimes it's nice to go into that folk song mood and then go back to structureculture.Yes.It's very interesting.Yeah.

[01:35:47.360] - Speaker 2
It opens it up.Yeah..

[01:35:49.660] - Speaker 1
For instance, like... How do you What I was thinking recently is the relationship of just every two bars. The tension and the release. Again. At an active. And then release, but goes on. And those are my three actors. Yeah.

[01:36:59.420] - Speaker 3
You understand what I'm talking about?

[01:37:17.560] - Speaker 1
I'm talking about feeling like a theater director, almost, the polyphony and that transparency of it. Yes. It's interesting if you take the next variation, which is using the same But going into… You're going into basically really… You're basically going into all exactly the same chords, but you're doing something so different in the next variation variation.

[01:38:16.740] - Speaker 2
The chords remain the same through the whole cycle.

[01:38:18.750] - Speaker 1
Absolutely. You can take this variation. Do it that slowly. It's just a different thing.

[01:38:35.740] - Speaker 2
Completely different. In the writing, does it say this next one is faster than the last one or no?

[01:38:41.190] - Speaker 1
Just nothing about it. Open. It just says variation two. Yeah. So this is just to take an extreme example here. You could do this. You could do it. You could that. Who is to say what you can't do? But that's basically to give extreme examples of how opened-And you said 15 is the one where it turns dark.

[01:39:10.330] - Speaker 2
What's 15?

[01:39:11.500] - Speaker 1
Yeah, so beautiful. It goes into It's funny to play it here in the sun with the birds and everything. I know, but…

[01:40:00.470] - Speaker 3
It goes on.

[01:40:08.340] - Speaker 1
Yeah, beautiful.

[01:40:09.000] - Speaker 3
But good, beautiful. But you could also...

[01:40:22.970] - Speaker 1
That thing, you could also do it. For youraster. And in that process, the voicing changes. All of a sudden, your bass character comes out, and just the music takes on another dimension. But those are just like, This is just very basic examples, then you can go into full mode and really explore within each tempo, that variant.

[01:41:07.160] - Speaker 2
For sure, you have to record it again. For sure.

[01:41:10.800] - Speaker 1
But I show you, the greatest moment in the Goldberg Variations is variation 25. That's where he expands time because they're all two or three minutes, and then all of a sudden, you have 10 minute long variation. Where we began with the aria, Here is variation 25. It's like we do… It's a tempo. It's incredible that this is indeed the same chord progression just taken into the negative and expanded almost three times in time. Amazing.

[01:43:46.320] - Speaker 1
Wayne, have you heard lonelier music? It's fantastic. The way he plays with dissonance. You know how he makes these sevenths and he just puts a knife in your heart and then he rotates it. Amazing. It's unbelievable. But that moment in the piece, I sometimes think about, how is it in the world premiere? If there was such a thing indeed. You don't know what's coming, What if you don't know what's coming in the Goldberg variation? You have the Aria, and then you have variation one, and then you have 14 variations, and they're all in G major, everybody's happy, it's so great. Then you have a big shock of the 15th variation, and you bounce back, and there you are, an hour into the piece, variation 24 is done. Then Then this hits you, and all of a sudden, you have a 10-minute long variation at that point in the structure. What are like structural... Bold. Master stroke.

[01:44:39.430] - Speaker 2
Really bold. Right? Yeah.

[01:44:41.240] - Speaker 1
Changes what this piece is about. Then you have the concluding variations and the great surprise of the aria at the end when it fades in. Like on the mix report, like I said, it's always there.

[01:44:56.450] - Speaker 2
Does that represent that it's coming around again And is the ending the beginning? Do you know what I mean? Are we starting over essentially?

[01:45:04.750] - Speaker 1
The thing is that once you finish it… Everybody is with you after 80 it, and then they applaud, and then you come back on stage and then again and again and again, and again, and again. And then they're like, Is there no encore? And then you're like, Well, the only encore you can play after this solar system of a piece is to go back into variation one. But then you have to play variation Yeah. Then I don't know how long your parking is. Then you go into this infinity cycle. But to me, it feels like you can't add to this in the act of playing it. It's a solar system. It's the area and the 30 planets. But the only thing you can do is to then take another cycle. But then maybe you go from LA to San Francisco.

[01:45:55.640] - Speaker 2
Tell me about your relationship to De Bussi.

[01:45:58.430] - Speaker 1
Oh, yeah. I mean, complex because he was a complex, thorny man.

[01:46:04.090] - Speaker 2
But I don't know anything about him.

[01:46:07.920] - Speaker 1
He came from the outside, which is always, I think, good and bad, but good, mostly. But he was an autodidact. He basically wanted to push the music world away from the governing power of Germany, which had Wagner and and Beethoven and all of them. He wanted to find what is French. He was a very nationalistic guy. I think he was amazing, but he was thorny. And the music, not exactly thorny.

[01:47:29.920] - Speaker 3
Very often with him, like at the beginning.

[01:47:49.160] - Speaker 1
Something about this represents a change. You just have a composer who sits down and he goes into the chord and explores it. Sometimes it's almost sonority for the sake of sonority space instead of that driving narrative. Of course, he does that narrative, but he-It's got a gentleness.

[01:48:11.480] - Speaker 2
It comes in with a gentleness and a curiosity.

[01:48:15.960] - Speaker 1
Yeah, but listen to the other guy on my French album, Jean-Philippe Rameau. This is music that he wrote when Mozart was just a boy. And listen to this.

[01:49:59.920] - Speaker 1
Can you believe 1762?Unbelievable.Right?So beautiful.It's an arrangement I made from his last opera. Just this great music that people don't really know. I called it The Arts and the Hours. Just an English title I gave it.It's soBeautiful. It wasn't, I think, premiered in its full version until 1963. It was only like that, 200 years later. But that's what I like. I like anachronism. I like composers who don't go with the tides of their times. It's so interesting. It's like Richard Strauss and Serkia Rachmaninov and Bach, in a way, was considered extremely old-fashioned when he was writing the music of the future, the Goldberg Variations. It was considered like old news. Nobody cared for that baroque structures. They wanted the light classical. Some crap like this. That's what the general public was after. But of course, he just did what he wanted. But those composers, it's like Carlo Gusualdo with his Madrigal, I think in the 16th century, that they were so futuristic that even Richard Wagner couldn't write something on that scale of wild harmony. It's so nice to look back on music history now and realize that it's not quite as linear as we sometimes think of it as.

[01:51:26.600] - Speaker 2
Do you remember the first piece you ever played in front of people when you were a child?

[01:51:31.830] - Speaker 1
God. No, I don't actually, but I imagine it was something like this. Something in that region. But I do remember one of the first pieces I composed. Yes. When I was eight, I think. It goes like... I have not played this for years, but That was like eight-Beautiful. Yeah, it was like an eight-year-old It sounds like an Eastern European melody. Yeah, it's like...

[01:52:36.950] - Speaker 3
I like...

[01:52:40.120] - Speaker 1
Yeah.i like that.Yeah..

[01:52:44.220] - Speaker 3
It could be like one of those sad Soviet cartoons or something.

[01:52:50.830] - Speaker 1
It could actually come from that. I was probably listening to.

[01:52:54.710] - Speaker 2
But it also has a nursery rhyme aspect to it. It's very beautiful.

[01:53:03.590] - Speaker 1
Yeah, it's sad.Beautiful. We had a grand piano. I'll tell you something beautiful. My parents had a sad thing happened to them in 1980, four years before I was born. My father His father passed away quite suddenly, and they inherited a little bit of money. They were then studying music in West Berlin, and they had nothing. They lived in a tiny little student flat. Mom, studying piano, dad, composition, in Berlin. They decided to take a loan and to buy a Steinway grand piano with all their money before they had even a modest apartment. So they brought this glorious piano into their little student flat in West Berlin, and then moved back home a few months before I was born. And then for the first seven years of my life, we had this tiny little basement apartment where the living room basically basically was the piano. I had a room with my two sisters. We had no space. My parents did this unbelievably irresponsible thing in an economic sense. To spend it all on music. And then, piano was the apartment. That's where we would gather. That's what I would play. And I sometimes think about that now when I have my pianos, and I think about the root of all of this being this romantic It was a decision of my parents to not just spend all their money, but take a loan and really put all their money into a piano and then come home and be like, Where are we going to live?

[01:54:40.560] - Speaker 1
Where are we going to put this piano?

[01:54:42.540] - Speaker 2
It's not an accident that you're you.

[01:54:44.410] - Speaker 1
Well, The piano cost at that point basically the same as an apartment in Iceland. I'm so grateful for their ill-advised finances, right now, at least, and I think about it. Then what I wanted to say as well is that we moved into a my bigger apartment, finally, when I was seven. My parents actually got me an upright piano, very old Danish upright piano, which is totally broken, but I would have that in my bedroom. Then this would be the glorious piano in the living room. But I had my own little private piano as well, where I could play any hour of the day and just have these intimate keyboard conversations with myself. I sometimes think about that, and two or three years ago, we should actually have an app right here, not just this fancy Steinway, because two or three years ago, I recorded an album called From afar, where I actually recorded the exact same music on grand piano like this, and then on an app-right piano.Beautiful.Like the one I grew up with.Beautiful..

[01:55:43.680] - Speaker 2
Tell me the difference in the playing the experience of sitting at a grand piano versus sitting at an upright for you.

[01:55:50.070] - Speaker 1
Just the response to these big vibrations, and of course, the acoustic, affects everything about the way you narrate the music. But the response on an upright piano, which is so much smaller and so much more immediate, it's much more like having that private conversation, that very intimate conversation. The grand piano, you have to work a a bit harder to make it into that intimate creature. So I think, yeah, my bedroom piano. It's just two different worlds. But I think the upper piano has a comeback. I really think so. You see, in in pop, in so much music, people are going back to it now and experimenting with it and taking it further, which I think is a wonderful thing. And in a way, very democratic because the great majority of people don't have parents to spend their money so ill-advisedly, like my parents. Almost all pianists in the world have simple operations on the app rights.

[01:56:53.110] - Speaker 2
When you're playing, are you listening? If you notice that the low notes aren't singing on this particular piano as well as you're used to, do you make adjustments as you're going based on what you're hearing?

[01:57:07.200] - Speaker 1
Yeah, all the time. You're constantly, in a way, that back part of your brain is in a way in that overdrive. But hopefully, it's a part of your subconsciousness and a part of your bigger listening rather than being like, I need one more hertz here. But you're constantly adjusting.

[01:57:24.590] - Speaker 2
How much do you think of the left and right-hand as two different players?

[01:57:32.900] - Speaker 1
Not so much. I mean, they are. But I think about the different players in each hand. So maybe the right-hand, I'm thinking about the two or three different players in that hand, and then the two or three, whatever it is in the music in that hand. But certainly, if you're doing... Maybe in this music, sure, because it's relatively simple. But I don't think about the hands to the physicality. I think about more in terms of inside the structure and the music as this organism, like a biological organism, almost, a web.

[01:58:02.890] - Speaker 2
Tell me some of the things that you've done in terms of recording that are not typical for a classical pianist.

[01:58:09.990] - Speaker 1
I mean, many, many, many, many. I love the idea of taking, especially my Bachs, recordings and taking them a little bit into an electronic more of a... Yeah, just a different direction. We've done many things like that, both on an apart piano and on grand pianos, but collaborating with really different musicians, One who did a fantastically beautiful fantasy on one of my recordings was Sakamoto Rioichi.Fantastic.It was an incredible man. It's a little bit like reversing the creative process. I usually take the music of Bach or somebody else and to redefine it for myself. There, I actually gave, or give sometimes my recordings to artists who I admire and sometimes do something with them myself, to, in a way, use the interpretation of old music as creative material for new compositions. That's what Sakamoto did, the Rio E. It's been done a lot. I did a little fantasy with my A&R producer, Christian Paltura, using basically Bach's most famous prelude. So I recorded this on an apart piano, actually, and then we created, I'm not going to say much, but we created something new with it. A memory of a memory, I think. It was a memory of and deep sadness in our lives when Johansson, my compatriot, Icelandic composer, had just died in Berlin back in 2017, I think it was.

[01:59:59.600] - Speaker 1
Did you know him? Yeah. We were actually planning a project together. We were going to take Beethoven and deconstruct him. I recorded some of his music as well, but he died so suddenly, and we did a fantasy to heal ourselves on this Bach prelude, called it End at the Hour of Death. There's another one which is called...

[02:00:24.760] - Speaker 2
Bach's Prelude.

[02:00:37.290] - Speaker 1
We should go... It's taking this prelude, but just using it as material for another excursion. That was called for Johann. Yeah, I get sad when I think about that because he had so much more I had in music. But yeah, I think very often in times of Those, I and so many other people go to Bach. I think it's a good idea whether you're feeling happy or sad. It somehow balances you in a way that I think it's always a good idea. But suddenly, when I'm feeling sad, there's nothing but back that can sometimes bring me back and give me strength.

[02:01:24.430] - Speaker 2
Have you ever recorded Sati?

[02:01:26.350] - Speaker 1
No, shouldn't I? Wouldn't that be nice?

[02:01:28.670] - Speaker 2
I love Sati.

[02:01:31.770] - Speaker 1
Wouldn't that be nice? But he's doing something so similar to You just wanted to go on forever.Yeah, same language. But from that French school comes our friend, Philipp. There's one cycle. Yeah. Then it goes into another cycle, and then the third cycle. That's called opening. That's the first track on my-Never wanted to stop.Right.Unbelievable It's so beautiful.

[02:04:30.430] - Speaker 2
It goes on. So beautiful.

[02:04:32.920] - Speaker 1
But it takes on a life of its own in a way when you play it. You don't know when you start where it's going to take you.

[02:05:14.960] - Speaker 2
Tetragrammatin is a website. Tetragrammatin is a whole world of knowledge.

[02:05:26.560] - Speaker 1
What may fall within the sphere of Tetragrammatin? Counterculture? Tetragrammatin. Sacred geometry? Tetragrammatin. The Avant-garde? Tetragrammatin. Generative art? Tetragrammatin. The tarot? Tetragrammatin. Out-of-print music? Tetragrammatin. Tetragrammatin. Biodynamics. Tetragrammatin. Graphic design. Tetragrammatin. Mythology and magic. Tetragrammatin. Obscure film. Tetragrammatin. Beach culture. Tetragrammatin. Esoteric lectures. Tetragrammatin. Off the Grid living. Tetragrammatin. Alt. Spirituality. Tetragrammatin. The canon of fine objects. Tetragrammatin. Muscle cars. Tetragrammatin. Ancient wisdom for a new age. Upon entering, experience the artwork of the day. Take a breath and see where you are drawn. Tetragramadin. Com.matin. Com.
