[00:00:07.020] - Speaker 1
Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. I was born in New Jersey, and my dad is from New York. My mom's from Tehran, actually. So We used to go to Tehran, and my mom's side of the family worked for the Shah. And when the Shah got overth, we had to flee the country. And that sent us inevitably to California because my uncle had moved to California. And we started coming there in like 1977, '78.

[00:00:45.690] - Speaker 2
Do you remember the food in Teherani?

[00:00:47.950] - Speaker 1
Yes. What was that like? Oh, the Persian food. It's just incredible. I mean, these civilizations, Middle East civilizations, African civilizations, the long-standing civilizations, even Mexican civilization. They've got worked out. They've figured certain things out. Eggplant dishes, Bottom June is what we say in Farsi. It's still my favorite. And I'm absolutely enamored with Persian food. And then, of course, the magic of the saffron In Athens, actually, this is crazy. So I'm in Athens, I'm doing a workout in the park. It was just in the suburb, Filofe. Filofe, it's a good one to look up if you're interested in going to Athens. And I'm in the park and I looked down, I'm like, that's saffron. So I photographed it and then checked it across the Internet. It's like saffron growing in the park in Athens. You pick the pistils out of the flower and you make rice out of it. And it's basically it's saffron. It's a psychoactive substance. It's found in nutmeg. It's found in sassafras also. What a thing. What a thing. Just the way the Persians revere that and how it fits into their culture. And it's actually the saffron compound, which is a carcinogen, but it can be tweaked into things that are heart-opening, let's just say that because it's MBA.

[00:01:59.210] - Speaker 2
India as well.

[00:02:00.230] - Speaker 1
India as well. Yeah. And the Persians and the Indians have such an incredible long history together. And some of the Pakistanis. So if you look at Iran, it borders all these countries. And Iran has been cursed for the last 2000 years, this goes back to the Ferdusci, which is the Iliad or the odyssey of the country. It's their great epic poem that describes their history. They've been cursed with poor leadership. And that's what we're dealing with today, and we will deal with that until the curse is lifted. And that's what we pray for.

[00:02:31.780] - Speaker 2
Do we know how the curse was put on?

[00:02:33.820] - Speaker 1
It is in the Ferdusci, as far as I remember. It was something like a 2000-year curse. It's like we're coming to the end of it. We're coming to the end of a lot of things, and the beginning of a lot of things.

[00:02:43.460] - Speaker 2
When did you move from the East Coast to the West Coast?

[00:02:47.810] - Speaker 1
In 1980. So in late '70s, '77, '78, '79, even 1980, that summer, we came to California to stay with my uncle. My uncle's right on the border, actually. How old were you about? I was about seven, eight, nine, 10 years old. Okay. Was a kid. Yeah, I was a kid. And that's I started growing avocados. In 1978, I planted my first avocado, and that's where I got the name. I've been just a lover of avocados ever since. Back then, it was a thing. It was like a delicacy. You know what I mean? We got one slice of avocado with dinner. That was my first impressions of avocado. Over the years, just the way it has evolved to become a worldwide food is epic. It's epic. It touches my heart because I'm so deeply connected to citrus and avocados from growing them as a kid and graffing them. We grafted bacon avocados, we grafted Zutano avocados, we grafted Haas avocados, we grafted all the great varieties of reed avocados, and all the great citrus, too. When we were a kid, we had one tree that we grafted together. It had five different citrus on it. I still have that love.

[00:03:50.680] - Speaker 1
We have at my house, over here, we have four different cacaus on one tree. Amazing. Just from those experiences as a kid. That's the gift I love giving to kids, by the way.

[00:03:58.800] - Speaker 2
It's a very magical It's a cool thing to see a tree with different kinds of fruit growing on it.

[00:04:02.430] - Speaker 1
It's beautiful. It's beautiful. It's fascinating. I just love the nature of how the tree gains a personality over time. I've been here almost 20 years. I've been here 19 years. Some of these trees have personality now.

[00:04:19.990] - Speaker 2
Let's say you would have grafted a lemon into an orange tree. Would the oranges change as well, or do they really stay separate forever?

[00:04:29.100] - Speaker 1
Let's Let's say you're graffing onto an orange root stock. The orange that's on there and the orange root stock will stay the same. But the lemon that you graft onto it will never produce proper seeds. The seeds might be viable, but they're always a throwback. In fact, I brought one. This is what you get. You get something crazy like this. This is some Jurassic throwback of an original lemon. Here, check it out.

[00:04:54.350] - Speaker 2
It's a lemon the size of a grapefruit, and it's round.

[00:04:58.340] - Speaker 1
It may If you pick into it, if you smell it, you can get that lemon. There's a little bit there. But that's what happens from graffing, is that it doesn't breed true to seed. So you get some throwback to the original citrus. And the original citrus is like Jurassic. It's real thorny. It's sometimes very difficult to consume. It's too strong or it's too bitter or it's too sour. And it definitely does revert back to the sours. You never get a sweet one if it reverts back. It always goes back to some primitive lemon or primitive lime or kefir lime or something like that.

[00:05:32.580] - Speaker 2
Are blood oranges naturally that way, or is that something that was grafted and turned into something? Good question.

[00:05:38.540] - Speaker 1
Well, it has to have come from... Okay, so what gives it that red color is hesperidine, which is really interesting because that's a red compound that is very strongly purifying of blood. This is a thing we can get into, which I am absolutely enamored with, which is this idea that the color pigments in the food tell you what the food does. So It's red food, red pigments, or it's blood and cardiovascular system. It's just obvious. Everything in nature, to me, to my mind, is always obvious. It can be understood by a five-year-old. When we say blood orange, it really does affect your blood and purify your blood. It had to have come from an original It's strange at some point that someone was breeding true to seed. They weren't graffing. And once they got the one that they like, then they graft that one. That's how haas is. It's how all the great varieties that we hear about, let's say, a Ponderosa lemon or a Meyer lemon, those are all grafted varieties. So you know what you're getting. So if you're someone who's like, okay, I want to put my 10 trees in the backyard, you want to know what you're getting.

[00:06:35.800] - Speaker 1
So you're going to get grafted trees. Here, for example, a lot of people like the Sharwell avocado tree doesn't get too crazy. But that's not me anymore. I grew up with that, and now I want to breed avocados that breed true to seed and have all the things that you want about the avocado. So for example, you want an avocado that doesn't have a lot of leaves. You want to be able to see the fruit. You want an avocado that's not too big. It doesn't get out of control. You know how it is in the jungle. It gets out of I mean, I've got an avocado tree that's the size of my house, and I was going to cut it down. But that night, right before, the guy was going to come over and cut it down. I had a dream, said, Don't cut that down. The guy shows up that morning, comes up the stairs, said, Bro, I can't cut your tree down, bro. I had a dream, could not have cut it down. I said, That's it. It stays. Those things happen, and avocados can get out of control. So I've been breeding for a certain type of avocado, which I'd love to gift you, actually.

[00:07:22.650] - Speaker 1
I have to go up there and cut a few down because it'll never get too big. It'll never get too bushy. You can see through it when it fruits half of its fruit and half of its leaves. It has a long perduncle, which is the thing that attaches it to the twigs or the stems or the- What's interesting about this is that you think of an orange as a thing, whereas you can become a connoisseur of oranges, and there may be how many varieties? Let me tell you something. I grew up as a citrus farmer in San Diego, in Southern California there, and on the border. All these years later, so I was living in Texas for a period of time. I had to move my business to Texas. I wasn't really happy with what's going on in I think a lot of us are in that boat. This is the most amazing thing. A friend of mine, he's like, Dude, you got these citrus, and it snowed. Usually when you have a frost and a snow in Texas, especially South Texas, it's going to kill the citrus off. He's like, Oh, no, no. This citrus survived perfectly on your farm here.

[00:08:17.260] - Speaker 1
I was like, What are you talking about? It's like, Everything got fried. What are you talking about? I get back there, and sure enough, in the corner of this farm are 15 what are called citrus trifoliata. This is the most amazing thing, Rick. This is one of those things that it just rocks your world. I couldn't believe that all my life I didn't know about this. We know how great lemons are. We know how great limes are. It's great to have a fruit with no sugar. That's such a cool thing. There's an orange with no sugar. Wow. It's good.

[00:08:46.360] - Speaker 2
Wow. I'd love to try that.

[00:08:48.130] - Speaker 1
It's a zone 6 orange. A friend of mine is growing it in front of his house in Pittsburgh. I'm like, Jim, is it really growing in front of your house in Pittsburgh? He's like, yes. It makes you through the winter. He's like, yes. It makes you through the snow. Yes. I'm like, what? Yeah. That's wild. It's wild. And the story of how that citrus came to America, nobody knows. Most people say, oh, yes, sometime early 1800s, it came over on a boat from England. Originally, it comes from China. But there's evidence it's been here since the Virginia colony, and it spread wildly out of the Virginia colony to the south and has been growing wildly in the south all the way to Texas. I had no idea. But it's good. And so I've done many, many fasts with that as my no sugar instead of lemon or lime. It's a sugarless orange.

[00:09:36.610] - Speaker 2
How would you describe the taste? What does a sugarless orange taste like?

[00:09:39.760] - Speaker 1
It's so frigging good because I'm an orange guy. For me, I can live on naval oranges. You give me 20 good California naval oranges, I'll eat the peel. I eat everything, the whole darn fruit. It's like that. It has the orange flavor. Is the peel okay to eat? Well, with a lemon, yes, you can eat the outside. With the lime, you can eat the outside. With the Try foliate orange, maybe not. But the seeds sure have a very strong antifungal element in them. All citrus does. It's good to eat a few citrus.

[00:10:09.520] - Speaker 2
That's why the seeds are bitter.

[00:10:10.380] - Speaker 1
Are bitter, yeah. It's good to have that occasionally because it's a sweet fruit, typically. When you're eating citrus, you want something that's bitter, it's going to kill off the candida and kill off the yeast, the things that feed on that sugar. Nature's logic is always correct.

[00:10:22.650] - Speaker 2
Tell me about your diet in those days. You're new to avocado. You get turned on to avocado. Were you eating a standard American diet at that time?

[00:10:31.060] - Speaker 1
Yeah, but my uncle was like, No, you guys can't have that. No sugar, none of this candy, none of this. We're out on a ranch. If you're walking to a store, you're walking miles. We had no choice. That's when I became conscious about food. That's when I became conscious about because we would go back to the East Coast, to New Jersey, New York, and then we'd have You-hoo's or whatever was happening over there. And big change. I always looked forward to the summers at my uncle's house for that reason. It was like something. And then as you get 14, 15, 16 years old, it was like, yeah, no candy, no sugar, that thing. And then we got into the raw foods when I was about 22, 23 years old, and that was a Do you remember what was the triggering event that started the raw foods? It started when I was in university and started reading books on health, and I read Fit for Life. It said the word in that book, raw foodist. I was like, A raw But that just made sense to me because you don't see a gorilla cooking something. A horse isn't cooking anything.

[00:11:35.050] - Speaker 1
It was a real sensible idea. I thought, I'm going to look into that. Step by step by step, I got deeper into it. Ended up getting a great book that I've been thinking about lately. I need to reread it. It's been a while, called Blatant Raw Foodist Propaganda. It was a great book back in the '90s, a classic. That got me started into, Okay, let me just get into this raw food. Then I went through the full detox, the 40-pound weight loss, the 60-pound weight loss, and the fasting and the cleansing. Really young, I was 23, 24 years old. By the time I was 27, 28, I was just at a peak level of health. But then I didn't really understand the things like cholesterol and things you need from the animal world. I was like, B12. B12 and just the key things that are important for neurological health and protecting your joints and connective tissue and stuff like that. As I evolved through those years, eventually I realized, Oh, yeah, there's a lot of deficiencies with vegan diet long term. Some people can go longer. I went long times on long years, 17 years as a vegan, something like that.

[00:12:39.820] - Speaker 1
Then I gradually got back into being a vegetarian. I'm a vegetarian today. It's not about what's right for everybody. It's just that's what I want to do for me.

[00:12:48.230] - Speaker 2
What's included in your diet that was not in your diet when you were vegan?

[00:12:52.720] - Speaker 1
Eggs. Oh, I love eggs. What a cool thing. Just have chicken. Do you eat eggs every day? Not every day, but- Mostly. Mostly, yeah. Then I love a really good sheep cheese or a Shev. Those are epic. That's something I did not eat for so many years. No cheese, no anything like that.

[00:13:11.940] - Speaker 2
You want milk or no?

[00:13:13.000] - Speaker 1
I will now. If it's If it's a quality, let's say it's Buffalo milk. You know what's trippy is that I can eat animal foods that are vegetarian and I can digest them properly. Fish or no fish? I don't do No, I don't do anything that involves killing.

[00:13:31.910] - Speaker 2
Did you ever do fish?

[00:13:33.300] - Speaker 1
I was never a fisheater. No. I want to get into this with you. I thought this was a cool area to get into about everybody asks, what's the right diet? I love what Rudolf Steiner said. He said, there are as many diets as there are human beings on Earth. That's the truth. That's the real truth. You have to use some parameters. For example, if you need to build blood, you go to red foods. If you need really a lot of blood, you go to red meat. If you need something daily, you're going to go to beets and beet juice. It's just everything's obvious like that. But what's not obvious is this ratio between fat, protein, and carbohydrates. Most people do well on a high protein, moderate fat, low carb. That's where most people are at. I had to play around with that for years to finally realize that what's right for me is high fat, moderate carb, low protein.

[00:14:25.640] - Speaker 2
It's closer to keto, really.

[00:14:28.040] - Speaker 1
Yeah, it is.

[00:14:28.910] - Speaker 2
Because keto is high fat, no carbohydrate, and low protein.

[00:14:34.340] - Speaker 1
Protein. I was the guy who... When we go out to dinner with my dad, we'd eat the fat off the ribs when I was a kid. I didn't like ribs, but I liked the fat. I remember those things. When it all was said, none, I was like, You know what? I really am an avocado person. I really love coconuts, and I really love olives, and that works for me. I can eat those things and be good all day. That's how you know because people go, How do you know? It's, Well, you can be tested. We can do a slow oxidizer test or fast oxidizer test. Or a fast oxidizer, you're going to burn that sugar quick, and you're going to be up and down in one hour. Then you know you got to have low carb. I'm in between on that. I can do pretty good on carbs, but not too much. But I can't do good on protein. I can't do it. I've eaten fish 10 times in my life. I'm a big believer. I'm a big Rudolf Steiner guy. I'm a biodynamic farmer. I'm a big believer that we bring the human back to the center and we ennoble the human being and we make the human being better.

[00:15:32.230] - Speaker 1
And when you're dealing with food, what the food does, it opens up different perspectives. And then the mushrooms are a whole world. And what a cool world that is. And I'd love to get into that with you. That's an absolute passion for me.

[00:15:44.490] - Speaker 2
Yeah. Let's talk about power dynamics a little bit.

[00:15:46.180] - Speaker 1
Okay.

[00:15:46.790] - Speaker 2
When did you first get into it?

[00:15:48.660] - Speaker 1
Well, I'm a reader, and when I was young and wanting to make it in the world and get out in the world, one of the things that I picked up on, I started in with Tony Robbins in 1984, and he came to a summer camp that I was at. This is before personal power, before he was a big celebrity and all that. And so I had tapes from him, and my brother kept going back to that summer camp years after we had went together. And my brother would bring back tapes. And on one of those tapes, Tony was saying, If you want to be a leader, you got to be a reader. And he said, If there's people around you who are geniuses, they're doing something different than you. You need to find out what they're doing. If you want to get the same results, find out what they're doing and do the same things.

[00:16:30.560] - Speaker 2
Yeah, learn from successful people.

[00:16:32.130] - Speaker 1
Exactly. Yeah. I thought, Okay, that makes sense. I went and talked to my friend Kevin, who was my cousin's best friend out there in East San Diego, near the border, my uncle's Ranch. He went to MIT at age 15. I said, What are you doing? You must be doing something different than me. I found out he was reading three books a day. I was like, Wow, okay. Then I went to my cousin, who was like a 200 IQ, went to University of Chicago at age 14, just a whole another level. I said, What are you doing? And guess what he was He was reading three books a day. I was 17 years old, 18 years old. I said, I'm going to do this. I'm going to just get into reading. I read every book in my mom's house. I became a voracious reader, read thousands of books. Then I stumbled into Rudolf Steiner. Rudolf Steiner stump me. I couldn't believe what I had come across. First of all, he left behind about a million pages of material, which I throw out the number a million, and we throw out the number a million all the time.

[00:17:26.690] - Speaker 1
Oh, it's a million of this, a million of that. A million pages of material is 50 60 pages every single day, Monday through Sunday, from age 15 to 65. It's an insane output. It's unimaginable.

[00:17:37.450] - Speaker 2
How many? 300 books in print or something like that?

[00:17:40.950] - Speaker 1
Yeah, something like that in print. A lot of it is he wrote 28 books, many of them big tomes. Like, philosophy of freedom is a big, thick tome. It's like that. It's like two inches thick, which I have a master's basically in philosophy. It was a political science degree, but it's really a philosophy degree because that's what we did. I read Steiner's book on philosophy, that book, and I'm like, this guy has an absolute mastery of the subject matter. How? It would take someone their whole life to be in this position just on this one subject, and he did that when he was in his 20s. So something's going on with this guy. That's what led me to biodynamic farming. Rudolf Steiner's- He created biodynamic. He created it, which really what he's really doing, and this is, again, core to my philosophy, and it was that we actually live in a magical reality. It's always science, this, and two plus 2 equals four and all this equations and all the engineering of our cars and bridges and everything else and airplanes. But this world that we're living in is magical. And so what Rudolf Steiner is really doing is he's saying he's mixing the stuff of the Earth with the stuff of the heavens in a unique way to create an output that's more than what the two parts together would equal.

[00:18:49.590] - Speaker 1
That's what it is. And therefore, it violates a principle that we're always at odds with the system about, which is the homeopathic principle. The homeopathic principle violates the scientism, which is like 2 plus 2 equals 4. It can never be more. It violates all these things. You go, wow, a little bit of input is going to give me a lot of output. Because ultimately, let's say I'm making a biodynamic prep, and we'll say it's biodynamic prep 500, which is you take the lactating cow poop and you put it in the horns, you bury it through the winter, then you dig it up, and then you mix that material, which isn't a whole lot of substance, into a barrel, let's say a 55-gallon drum, and you swirl it one way for a minute. Let's say you're swirling clockwise and you're going to go… You go down in the sound, you sing to it. Then when you when you swirl the other way, upward counterclockwise, you go… You go higher for a minute, and then you just do that for an hour. Then you take that stuff and you go and spray it on all your plants.

[00:19:49.750] - Speaker 1
Let's say it's biodynamic prep 500, and let's say it's coming up, actually, we'll probably do it in March.

[00:19:54.730] - Speaker 2
Do it every year? Is it an annual thing?

[00:19:56.900] - Speaker 1
It's an annual thing. It's an annual thing, yeah. Sometimes you might In this particular thing I'm about to describe, you might get two cracks at it. You might get two bites at the apple because it usually happens in March and May. It's when the full moon is in opposition to Saturn. When those are in opposition with each other, then the moon would be in the sky and Saturn is below, then you have huge fertilization potential for root growth. That's what the 500 prep is for.

[00:20:24.730] - Speaker 2
As wild as that sounds, on the other side, we know the phases of the moon impact waves.

[00:20:32.160] - Speaker 1
We know that. A hundred %. Everyone knows that. You can't get a sun tan at midnight. The sun and moon affect you.

[00:20:37.070] - Speaker 2
We know these things. Yes. The idea that it has an effect that we are not aware of, it's very possible.

[00:20:44.430] - Speaker 1
It's likely.

[00:20:45.340] - Speaker 2
It's certainly not unrealistic.

[00:20:47.950] - Speaker 1
Right. Agreed. Because you get people who just don't understand astrology. When I say astrology, I'm not talking about the, here's your horoscope thing. It's not that. The positions of the heavenly bodies have an effect. It's just like You can't get a sun tan at midnight. It's obvious stuff. Every cop knows that on a full moon, you got to be on your game. More stuff happens. Anyway, so this opposition will have an effect on roots. I'm telling you, you can feel it happening when it's happening. We'll go around in the evening, usually on that day, and we'll spray the roots of all our favorite trees, and something happens. It's profound. Then if we're lucky, we can get one another time in May, and that's it. For that prep, that's 500. Then you do 501 and 502. Now, Rudolf Steiner is prescribing really a form of magic. That's where I'm trying to get at.

[00:21:40.280] - Speaker 2
I think of it that way. But also-It's very measurable. It It really makes sense, and it's measurable. It's more like alchemy.

[00:21:48.280] - Speaker 1
Yes, it's alchemy. In my mind, alchemy and magic are synonymous. Because alchemy is also a way of mixing the stuff of the heavens and the Earth together in a unique pattern or strategy to create an outcome that is more than the sum of its parts. I mean, your thing is music, and you've done a lot of records, I assume, and probably many that I like. But I think with music, and you correct me if I'm wrong, you're trying to create something where what the band does and what is happening, what the final product is put out is more than the sum of its parts. Is that a reasonable statement?

[00:22:23.970] - Speaker 2
Absolutely. It's out of our control. We respect the fact that something Something happens that it's not better because we are trying to make it better. We're giving it space to allow it to be better. To be better. That force is- Sometimes it does and sometimes it doesn't, but you have to be really patient.

[00:22:41.410] - Speaker 1
Yes, I love that. That's the philosophy. It's like you let the forces of nature work. You let the divine powers work and you just allow. I think a big part of farming and a big part of just living in harmony with nature is allowing. I think that's also a big part of wisdom is It's just being comfortable with the unknown.

[00:23:03.280] - Speaker 2
Yeah. Is there more to biodynamics than just the input of the heavenly bodies? Or is that it?

[00:23:10.780] - Speaker 1
Well, that input and all, let's say biodynamic 500, 501, 502, 503, 504, all the way up to 511, something like that. All of that input is going to create more robust food. The idea of the biodynamic farm is that the biodynamic farm becomes a place where, for example, let's see you have mentally handicapped children, homeless people, people who don't know how to fit into society. The biodynamic farm becomes a place for those people, and that's how Rudolf Steiner described it. And that's really what it is. And I've seen that in action, and it is really epic. When you have people who are mentally handicapped and born that way, there's a place for them, and it's the biodynamic farm. So for example, I went to a biodynamic farm in Iceland. This is a beautiful experience. And I want to lay out a holistic experience here because biodynamics is about creating better food. It's about creating better people. It's about creating better farms. It's about the Holy connection between you and the Earth. It's about also knowing that everybody has their place. Nobody is to be left outside. Nobody isn't just to be abandoned. There's a place for them.

[00:24:13.460] - Speaker 1
And I was with the number I'm a number one biodynamic farmer in Iceland. I'm a huge fan of the country of Iceland. I've been going there for 30 years, almost once a year, sometimes twice or three times a year. I love the people of Iceland. And unfortunately, he's passed away, this gentleman I'm talking about. But being there on his farm, and he had translated 28 of Rudolf Steiner's books into the Icelandic language. And I asked him, by the way, on that, I said, What do you think of Rudolf Steiner now after you translated this guy's work? I mean, just your breadth of knowledge of this guy's work. And he said, Like every great master, the words change and they change in meaning as you change. And I was like, Wow. It gave me chills. It was so cool. Anyway, so just to see that they had taken all these mentally handicapped children from all over and they had given them a spot, and they were basically in the... It's a cold winter there. And so they're in the barns with the animals, petting them, loving them, combing them, kissing them. I was like, You talk about milk with love in it, it's there.

[00:25:15.380] - Speaker 1
It has it.

[00:25:15.790] - Speaker 2
And this participation from these people heals them as well.

[00:25:20.600] - Speaker 1
It was perfection. Then you see, we're so brainwashed with, Oh, this kid, he's born mentally handicapped or something is wrong with this kid. He's autistic or whatever. We're in that mindset that something is wrong. There's nothing wrong. I just want to just diverge because one of my favorite garments that I have was given to me by a very dear friend of mine. I went over to his house and he pulled his shirt up and I was like, Oh, my God. He had a cancer. He was an old friend of mine, and I was like, I saw it, and I was like, He's not going to make it. Black growth all over his body. He showed me that and we had a parting moment of I'm not going to make it, bro. He gave me a gift, and it was a Rudolf Steiner jacket. This fleshes out this biodynamic idea because Rudolf Steiner basically said that on a biodynamic farm, you have people who are mentally handicapped or autistic, and so they don't have an ego construct like we do. And therefore, they have certain powers. And one of the powers is that they can take, let's say, I'm just going to lay out how this garment was made that my friend gave me.

[00:26:30.220] - Speaker 1
That in the highland peat bogs of Iceland, in the highland peat bogs of North America and Canada, and highland peat bogs of Scotland and in Norway, we have evidence of, for example, in Scotland, of them pulling out Scottish Kings 2,000 years later, and they're still intact. Their organs are still intact, their skin is still intact, the tattoos are still there. What's going on there? And Rudolf Steiner said that in those areas, the forces of evolution, the things that break things down, are arrested. And therefore, things mummify and can't move through the process of evolution and recycling. And therefore, the spirits and souls of those beings can be trapped there. And this gets into the whole thing of the mummification of the Egyptians. And that's a whole another story we could get into.

[00:27:16.060] - Speaker 2
Does it have to do with cold or no?

[00:27:17.780] - Speaker 1
Yes, it does have something to do with cold. Although it could happen, you could have mummification happen if you got, say, deep into the earth and you were protecting that body from forces of recycling. And there's something to be said for this idea that if you're mummified, you can't reincarnate back in here. That's a Rudolf Steiner thing because there's part of you still here. That's interesting. Yeah. It's a very interesting angle. I'm a believer in reincarnation, not because I think it's a good idea, but because the science is there. Ian Stevenson, Max Tucker, Dr. Brian Weis, Rudolf Steiner, and many other amazing... Paul Pyersol wrote a great book on cases of kids who had memories and information they couldn't have had. Thousands of cases. Anyway, Come back to our point, with this jacket, in those peat bogs, there's only one plant that grows, peat. We know the peat bogs because they go in there and they'll cut peat bricks out and use it to burn because it's a useless material, supposedly. At any rate, that peat material can be woven into an animal fabric. And when a person does that who has no ego construct, they can liberate the spirit of the bog and bring them back into the forces of evolution and the forces of life.

[00:28:31.190] - Speaker 1
And they will be then connected and attached to that garment. They will be actually obligated to protect the wearer of that garment. This is the garment, the jacket that my friend gave me when we had that fateful meeting. Amazing. It was amazing. Now, I have worn that garment for over 14, well, about 10 years. I'm telling you, I have had incidents happen. I was arrested at the border coming. This is at the Coutts border, coming into the United States on Boxing Day, December 26, 2020. I'm coming across the border, and they arrested me. I was at the border. I'm like, For what? That's what I was wondering. I had that jacket on. Every time I'm in that situation, I got that jacket, I put that jacket on tight, and I was like, Okay, I don't know what this is, but we're going to find out. After a while, one of the cops comes in. He says, By the way, this is the Coots crossing between Alberta and Montana, Canada into the United There was nobody there. It's December 26th, 2020. There wasn't a single car went by, no trucks, nothing. It was dead as a doornail.

[00:29:37.830] - Speaker 1
Finally, the cop comes into this jail cell and he says, The Secret Service wants to talk to you. What? I was like, Is that what this is about? He's like, Yes. I was like, Okay, let's talk to them. As he got me out, he's like, You don't actually have to talk to them. We can do it. We can let you go. I was like, Oh, okay. Then he basically said, They put a thing out on your name. They've been trying to get you, but you don't have to talk to them. As it happened, he said, I was telling him, Should I go or should I stay? He's like, Well, you probably should talk to them, find out what's going on because they'll stop, they'll harass you at every border crossing. I said, That makes sense. He said, Can we come in and listen? I said, Yeah, come in. It was the three cops that were there, that was the only guys there, and me in one of the backrooms. I hit the speaker button. I said, This is David Wolf. What is this about? Basically, somebody swatted me. Somebody said I was going to kill the President or whatever.

[00:30:33.220] - Speaker 1
It was just BS. And the cops there were pissed off. They had to do this whole run around with me, take me to jail, sell, get my stuff. They were pissed.

[00:30:42.620] - Speaker 2
Do you ever get more information on why you were swatted?

[00:30:45.460] - Speaker 1
I think I know who it was. It was a person. It was a person who was trying to get me. Everybody has these things of people don't like what you have to say or people don't like you. I'm big in social media as you are big in your world People don't like what you do. That's just how it is. But anyway, me and the cops there, we had a good laugh and we had a good time, and they carried my stuff out to the truck. I was meeting my girlfriend at the time in Boise, Idaho. It was about 18 hours drive through three snowstorm, but I was so stoked to be out of jail. I drove the whole night long. When I got through the final snowstorm, man, I just had this big smile on my face. It was a great experience overall. But I had that jacket on and I felt the power of it, and I was like, wow, okay. Anyway, so that's magic. You see what I'm saying? Now, anytime you find me, Rick, I will have that jacket on me because I know the power, and I believe in the power.

[00:31:41.060] - Speaker 1
It could be my belief is affecting it. Sure, I get that perspective, but no, It's something more.

[00:31:50.160] - Speaker 2
Tell me a little bit about the manner of Hawaii.

[00:31:53.120] - Speaker 1
Oh, man, you're getting into my favorite subjects. When you get off a plane in Hawaii, you know this. You smell the air, and you It hits you instantly. It's in the air, it's in the water, it's in everything. It saturates the place. When you're in the Andes, yeah, you sense it. All those minerals crunched up and the movement of those mountains and whatever, raise the Andes. When you get some of that great quinoa or that goes great sweet potatoes from that region, you go, Oh, yeah, or the great cheeses, those big fluffy cheese that they have in the Andes. You can sense some of the mana, some of that aspect. To my mind, it's minerals that we don't have names for. What are you talking about? We have the periodic table of the elements. But we have proven conclusively over the years, and this goes back to the Ormus research of David Hudson, it goes back to the alchemists of Europe and throughout all history, that gold can appear in different forms, that silver can appear in different forms, that rhodium and irradium and some of these platinum group elements can appear in different forms, and that everything doesn't quite stack up.

[00:32:50.970] - Speaker 1
Another way of looking at that, and eventually where I had to come to with it, is that the periodic table of the elements is three-dimensional. Or you could look at, what was his name? The great thinker. He came up recently. Russell. Walter Russell. You got it. Who is the guy who was on Joe Rogan recently? Terrence Howard. Terrance Howard. I love Terrance Howard's philosophy because it breaks the mold. People are like, Well, this is inaccurate. What about this? And what about that? It's like, Look, You explain to me how one times one is one, but the square root of one is not one. And then we'll talk. This is also fundamental to my philosophy is that no matter how rational you think something is, like our numbering system, one times one is one, but the square root of one is not one, that's irrational. So there's an irrationality that's impregnated into everything in this reality. That's just obvious to me. It's like, how do you have a brand new baby with all this potential, all this amazing future, if entropy was the only thing happening? It's not. It's entropy. There's an organizational force that comes in.

[00:33:51.770] - Speaker 1
There's the irrational and there's the X factor. Our lives have been saved at various times by bizarre things that occurred. It's an X factor. You go, it's irrational. To me, that's what's bleeding in the energy is the irrational number. That's my personal philosophy. Pi, 3. 14159265, 358979, it goes on and on. Anyway, so I feel like the mana is maybe minerals that have other forms.

[00:34:19.960] - Speaker 2
Tell me about Ormus.

[00:34:21.690] - Speaker 1
I spent a lot of years on this subject. I was originally, back in 1995, a woman called me up and she said, You have these tapes on this? I on raw foods. I'm talking about- Cassette.

[00:34:32.980] - Speaker 2
Cassette.

[00:34:33.480] - Speaker 1
Audio cassette tape. Casset, yeah, the magnetic strip tape. She said, I want to send you this series of tapes, and can we do a trade? I said, Sure. She explained to me roughly, and I got this idea was about alchemy. I was like, Okay, cool. Let's check this out. That started me on a really interesting journey because I got those tapes, and it was the Yelm lecture and the Dallas lecture of David Radius Hudson, who was the rediscoverer of an ancient well-known fact That gold exists in other forms, silver exists in other forms, copper exists in other forms, iron exists in other forms, mercury exists in other forms, and lead exists in other forms, and antimony, too. Antimony is earth, right? Copper is Venus.

[00:35:12.030] - Speaker 2
Would colloidal silver be an example of this or no?

[00:35:14.560] - Speaker 1
I would say coded silver. We have this product, coded silver, that was invented by a friend of mine who's a very famous electronics guy from Clarkson University in upstate New York. Dr. Popp, who's his brother-in-law, he's in the health world. He's like, You've You got this coded silver, which you can get a concentration down like 20,000 parts per million. What's happening there is normally when you create a colloidal silver, you can't get a very high concentration of silver because they cluster. That's why we make chains out of silver and gold and metals, because metals have a tendency to cluster with themselves. That's a problem with silver if you're using it as a medicine because it clusters. Then when you ingest it, it hits one spot of your digestive tract and it's too much in one place. It can injure your healthy microbiome, your healthy bacteria and probiotic arrangement. It's a little bit different. What the coded silver brings to the table, which I think in my mind, it actually would be the salt of silver, because silver exists in at least four forms. The one we see, the salt of it, which is an alchemical riddle.

[00:36:16.420] - Speaker 1
The sulfur of it, that's an alchemical riddle, and the mercury of it, that's an alchemical riddle. With gold, for example, over the years, eventually, and I'll come back to the silver in a second, we eventually figured out how to make the alchemical salt of gold. We figured it out, and it was a long process, and I figured out from starting- Starting with gold? Starting with gold. You starting with gold, and then you push it back into its Ormus form. To give some hints, everybody, to the Ormites out there, people are interested in Ormus. What you're trying to do with gold is you're trying to remove the energy. It's up from the enzymes of the environment, the sun, the weather, the elemental forces. Once it's come up to the surface and been brought into the elemental forces, it pops like popcorn and becomes actual metallic gold.

[00:36:56.310] - Speaker 2
Explain what you mean pops like popcorn.

[00:36:58.290] - Speaker 1
It's in a different form in the Earth. And so, yes, there can be metallic gold in the Earth, but most of the gold in the Earth is not in a metallic form. It's in the form of a ceramic and it would test as aluminum.

[00:37:09.370] - Speaker 2
Would it look like aluminum?

[00:37:10.960] - Speaker 1
Like the rocks of Eastern Canada have a high amount of aluminum in them. They have a weird specific heat. They get cold really easily, but it's a real light rock, and it's just a high aluminum rock. And therefore, to my mind, I'm like, Oh, there's Ormus Gold in this rock for sure, 100 %. And what we do to get the Ormus Gold, there's different ways to go about it. I've had it pop out of... Here, let me just tell you, if you're asking me about popcorn, like popping, like popcorn, one way we've gone about it is you can Vortrap very high-I don't know what that word is. I'll explain it. We call it Vortrapping. So we call it It's a vortex trap system where you're running water through a sink, let's say, you can think of your kitchen sink or just think of your bathroom sink, and the water spiraling down the drain. The outside of that sink has magnets on it. It that are North Pole facing in. Then you enclosed that sink up so that the water eventually goes… It's like a cylinder, but it can drain out the bottom. But it spirals so strongly in there that it can also push out the top.

[00:38:15.980] - Speaker 2
Does the water act differently with the magnets? Yes. What does it do differently?

[00:38:22.090] - Speaker 1
These type of high energy particles or Ormus particles or strange matter that's in water, it's in certain waters in particular in very high amounts. I'll explain this as we get into this because I have a lot of 30 years experience with this. It's in certain waters in very high concentrations. That stuff will try to get away from the magnetic field because the magnetic field will erase its memory is what we suspect. That's my guess. We'll try to run up. Let's say we have a cylinder. Let's say it's a cylinder like this right here. We're spinning this. I'm sending the water into this at an angle and it's spiraling down. It's going down here.

[00:38:56.870] - Speaker 2
Let's say it's like a funnel.

[00:38:58.500] - Speaker 1
It's a funnel, yeah. Like a funnel with a cylinder on top.

[00:39:01.870] - Speaker 2
The water is spinning around the inside of the outside of the funnel.

[00:39:06.590] - Speaker 1
Yeah, and going down the drain.

[00:39:07.740] - Speaker 2
And going down the drain. But it's not going straight down.

[00:39:09.820] - Speaker 1
It's spinning around. It's spinning around, right. Swirling. You're swirling it. Water loves that swirling action. Water loves to be swirled and twirled, and it doesn't like straight lines.

[00:39:19.700] - Speaker 2
Is that structured water?

[00:39:21.200] - Speaker 1
It will structure the water for sure because you're spinning it. Now, when it goes down the drain, there's a part of the water body that wants to centrifugate It wants to move outward and down. But there's also part of that water body that wants to centripetalize, which means it wants to move inward and up. What we're doing is we have a straw that would be right in here Imagine it's spinning, it's going down the drain to- A straw at the top. A straw that goes in. And then that straw when it's in here is like Swiss cheese. It has holes in it. It might even have a wick in there so that it's able to wick the stuff that wants to come up. And then that goes into another tube that then goes into another one, another Vore trap, that then goes into another Vore trap.

[00:40:08.890] - Speaker 2
Vore trap spins water-In a magnetic field.

[00:40:12.200] - Speaker 1
In a magnetic field. Allowing the water to escape both Down and up.

[00:40:17.040] - Speaker 2
In some ways it separates.

[00:40:19.160] - Speaker 1
It's separating the water body. That's it. You got it. It's separating a fraction out that would have a higher Ormus content or higher strange matter content. Okay, now there are certain springs. Now, I'm a springwater hunter. People who know me, they know that about me. I've hunted over 400 springs. Tell me about that, too.

[00:40:34.440] - Speaker 2
Tell me about that.

[00:40:35.350] - Speaker 1
I'm a Victor Schauberger guy, a warmest guy. Over the years, I've hunted down over 400 springs all over the world and every continent except Antarctica. When springwater comes up out of the Earth on its own accord, something very fascinating is happening. It's like the water will come out of the ground at, let's just say, 48 degrees Fahrenheit. The ground temperature is 58 degrees. That doesn't make sense. How is it coming out colder than the ground right next to What about osmosis, diffusion? It's supposed to be the same temperature, but it will be significantly colder. The colder that the water comes out, the better it is. This phenomenon tells me that there's a whole missing element to our sciences. What's causing it to be pulled up? And it's being suctioned up, by the way. I love that subject. I'd love to get into that with you. We'll get that one step at a time.

[00:41:25.100] - Speaker 2
So it doesn't come up because of pressure.

[00:41:27.520] - Speaker 1
Right. Then it would heat. Some springs do, and they'll come up and it'll be like hot springs or ground temperature springs. Some springs, like we have at our farm here in Hawaii, it's going to come out because the mountain's full of water. It's a seepage spring. The mountain's full of water, and eventually it seeps out because it just can't hold any more water. That's what we have in our front yard. Like an overflow. It's an overflow. There's a seepage spring. Then there's also a forest spring, a wicking effect created by the forest, which really is a it's vortexing phenomenon that's pulling the water up and on top of mountains, for example, or hills. And then there's what we call primary water springs, which are in seams where there's volcanic activity. So for example, you've probably been to Byron Bay, Australia. You have a very ancient continental shelf, and through that, busting through that as volcanic activity. And in the seam of that, you're going to have great spring water, which is primary water, which comes from deep in the Earth. It's like when Mount St. Helen's happened, you have the explosion and the volcanic activity, but then you have a very difficult event to comprehend afterwards, which is you have a tsunami of water comes out.

[00:42:36.140] - Speaker 1
And it's like, where did the water come from? What do you mean? There's a tsunami of water with a volcano? We were never told about that. But if you look into these phenomenon, it's part of the phenomenon. What is believed is that in the deepest part of the Earth, it's all water under everything. It's fresh water. It's not saltwater. We call that primary water. The primary water, where you can get it, is really good and will have a lot of this strange matter It can have so much strange matter.

[00:43:02.900] - Speaker 2
Describe the strange matter.

[00:43:04.040] - Speaker 1
The strange matter is like a very high Ormus content. Let's say I did what I do at my house. This is my other place in Ontario, Canada. I have four Vore traps on a spring. Our house is all spring water. It's not a well. It's a real surface spring where the water comes up on its own accord and then spills over. What we've done is created a pool. We contain it so it spills as it's coming up. It has a nice pool to fill up, and then it spills over and goes down the hill into a creek. We take that water and we We basically use spiral pipes and pump it up to the house. Then I'll send it through all these VoreTrap units. Then the final product will be, I'll bottle that and that's what I drink because it's a way of filtering the water without pushing it through a membrane. I'm never destructuring the water. It's always even more informed. It's always even more vortex. Now, I might see a phenomenon, like a spontaneous Vortex in that jug, weird stuff like that. But that spring, the one I'm on-I feel like I've seen that.

[00:44:01.550] - Speaker 1
You've seen it, probably. People have seen this before, but they just... Because the overlay of society or whatever the programming is, you didn't see that. There's nothing here. Don't look there. But there's things like that that happen in this world that we're at that place now. We're starting to look a little more closely and also to get out of our judgment. Because we don't know nothing. I don't know nothing about anything. I'm just exploring. I'm curious. If I took that system that I have at my house and I put it on Chalk Lake on which is a very high amount of this Ormus material in it. I could not contain that water in glass. It would disintegrate the glass. It has too many of those high energy particles, which now, if you're listening closely, you're going, Why is it doing that to glass? Because You've concentrated it out of its natural balance, and it's trying to use silica, the glass material, to anchor itself or stabilize itself. Otherwise, it's wildly out of control. Now, if you put that in your body, it immediately starts getting into your The deepest part of your nervous system, your brain.

[00:45:02.550] - Speaker 1
It transforms you. It can actually detoxify you because it's such a high energy substance.

[00:45:07.260] - Speaker 2
Could it do damage?

[00:45:08.910] - Speaker 1
Can detox damage somebody? Yes, it can. That's true. I mean, for being honest, you have to go slow. What we recommend is if you're going to do that high energy particle water, I drink that all the time when I'm at home, but I'm used to it. For somebody else, it's just a splash in a normal drinking water, so it's too strong. The point of all this is that I'm pointing out we're getting at this material from another direction through water. I can also get to material that will shear glass in that exact same way by taking gold and pushing it back into its Ormus form, stabilizing it with silica. But if I don't have enough silica in there, it will chew into the glass container that I'm using.

[00:45:47.180] - Speaker 2
How do you push it backwards?

[00:45:48.690] - Speaker 1
You have to remove the energy. The first way to do that is you have to create a gold oxide. Now, immediately everyone goes, Gold isn't oxidizable. You can't create a gold oxide, but there is a way. That's alchemy. We eventually figured out how to create the gold oxide. Then you have to push the gold oxide.

[00:46:04.380] - Speaker 2
When you figured it out, is it like, Oh, yeah, of course, or was it- It's a trick.

[00:46:08.920] - Speaker 1
It's an alchemical trick because you're open. You're able to hear it. Normally, I wouldn't even get into this stuff because people are not open. But basically, my discoveries in this field of Ormus Gold prove conclusively 100% that alchemy is real because it doesn't take a high technology. It just takes a clever person. I was like, Oh, yeah. The alchemists going back, even back to Egypt and every place in between, they knew they were able to figure this out. And so what we figured out is one piece of the alchemical riddle of just gold, of that one metal gold. We figured out the salt of gold. It's a sodium gold silicate, actually, the compound is. Interestingly, and I think you can comprehend this, it's a tetrahedron. The gold ion is held in a silica tetrahedron. It's in the middle and you have the A point here, a point there, a point there, and a point there. You have four points with the gold in the middle, so the other golds can't get to it, and therefore it's monatomic, and therefore it flips into its Ormus form with its properties. It has different properties. What does it do?

[00:47:13.770] - Speaker 1
It makes any tissue that it touches younger, 100%. Any tissue it touches will make it younger.

[00:47:19.500] - Speaker 2
So it's the fountain of youth.

[00:47:20.470] - Speaker 1
It is a fountain of youth type of thing, but it's only one piece of the overall alchemical riddle of the philosopher's Stone. This is my research in alchemy, so I'm just going to lay it out here because there will be people who will pass me up quickly. To make the philosopher's stone, and this is my research in all my life, you take the salt of gold, the sulfur of gold, and the mercury of gold, which, by the way, there is no mercury in gold. That's one of the big tricks. You have to figure out something else instead of the mercury of gold. You have to mix those together, probably in a clay egg that then goes in a forge and is superheated to create the philosopher's stone. The philosopher's stone, and this is another thing, too, you can arrive at it by inner work. What has happened in my life from just the one thing, the Armis Gold discovery, and the crazy people that have attracted my life, the amazing people that have attracted my life, have proven to me 100% that you must work on your own ego, your own ethics, your own morality, or you will not be able to advance.

[00:48:25.650] - Speaker 2
That's how it's protected.

[00:48:26.560] - Speaker 1
That's how it's protected. Yeah. Yeah. That's how the secret protects itself. That's what they told us. That's what all the alchemical books said. That's been my experience. Not going to deny that.

[00:48:36.270] - Speaker 2
What do you know about deuterium?

[00:48:37.930] - Speaker 1
I'm big into deuterium depleted water for sure. Ddw water. Okay, so just by definition, what I just described as a Vortrap, it's going to provide you a DDW water because deuterium is heavy and it wants to centrifugate and move down. When I'm going after what is wanting to centripetalize, move in and up, automatically it's going to have a lower amount of deuterium in it. There's different ways to arrive at deuterium depleted water. I like Vortrapping. That's the way I like to do it. I also like fractional freezing. That's another way because the deuterium water will freeze first. You can fractionally freeze half of it, remove it. How does it happen in nature?

[00:49:19.890] - Speaker 2
How is some water deuterium depleted?

[00:49:22.400] - Speaker 1
Good question. Okay, well, I'll just tell you what we know, where I'm guessing, but this is what we know. We know that the deeper you go into ice core data, the lower the deuterium. This is indicating that there was lower deuterium in past ages of the Earth's history. Probably this means that the Earth is pretty old. The deuterium increases towards the tropics and decreases into the Arctic and Antarctica. That's another interesting thing. If I get good spring water out of the Arctic and Iceland, it might be a 139. 140 is considered deuterium depleted or lower. And so 139 of natural spring water is really good. So glacial meltwater or Arctic spring water, excellent source of DDW water naturally. What about DDW being less in the tropics and then in relationship to Hawaii? In Hawaii, we also have other factors at work, too. By the way, Just like how everything progresses, this whole subject of deuterium, first of all, they said originally, all hydrogen is the same, it's never different. Then some guy was sprouting tobacco seeds. What was his name Paul something? Anyway, the scientist, he realized that he could not sprout seeds on deuterium rich water.

[00:50:31.020] - Speaker 1
If it had too much deuterium in it. In fact, it was D₂O, which deuterium is hydrogen, but it has an extra neutron in it. Tritium has two neutrons in it. In the beginning, they said it was all the same, but now we know that deuterium and tritium are toxic. They're toxic to life, actually. Life, you and all the plants around you and your dog and your cat and everything on Earth is trying to excrete the deuterium and tritium. It doesn't want to accumulate it. If we hit a crisis I think it's about 154, 155 parts per million of deuterium, then we will have a diagnosis. We will have a crisis, a health crisis. The idea originally came from this guy was sprouting tobacco seeds, and then eventually it was the Russians got onto it and they realized, okay, we can get the deuterium out of the human body, but we have to do alternative days of fasting with dry fasting. So water fasting with dry fasting, water fasting with dry fasting for 20 days, which is great, but very few people can do that. Then the Hungarian got to it and they said, Jeez, we got something even better.

[00:51:34.150] - Speaker 1
They had an idea that they could fractionally distill out the deuterium.

[00:51:38.430] - Speaker 2
When were these?

[00:51:39.930] - Speaker 1
The Russian stuff was, say, 1950s and '60s. Hungarian came in the '70s and '80s. Then they did an enormous amount of research on deuterium depleted water because we don't want the deuterium and we don't want tritium on cancer. They found out that you could drink water that had low deuterium. Over time, say three months, I think is the normal time frame that they would use, it would lower your deuterium. It would have an effect of pushing out or activating your deuterium detoxification mechanism. That's some really cool stuff. You can fractionally distill it, you can fractionally freeze it to get the deuterium out, or you could Vortrap it, you could centrifugate it. Or another way of doing that is saying you could use what's the term of art in the nuclear industry. If you get these devices which are designed to create a hydrogen bomb, you're going to get arrested. It's for creating a nuclear bomb. So don't do that one. But it would work the same. It would work the same. They're giant spinners where they spin the water out because they're concentrating the hydrogen. In a hydrogen bomb, you want deuterium and tritium. I see.

[00:52:43.890] - Speaker 1
So you can spin it out because it's heavier.

[00:52:50.020] - Speaker 2
What are the different ways of using a tobacco?

[00:52:51.890] - Speaker 1
Oh, God, so many ways. There's snuff, so rapace, where you powder it. As you go further north out of, say, the Amazon, you get more and more into smoking it. Typically in Central America and maybe even Amazonia, in ancient times, tobacco was more chewed by the common person and was more snuffed, which means- And what form would you chew it in? They would basically create little triangles of tobacco and just put it in. So it would be fermented. It wouldn't be fresh, although sometimes it was fresh. Sometimes, it depends on the tribe. And if you're dealing with a big civilization. Let's just say a big Central American civilization. The common person would chew it. They'd be a chewing tobacco person. The elites would smoke it.

[00:53:39.810] - Speaker 2
How would you ferment it?

[00:53:41.500] - Speaker 1
So if you're in, if you want to do it here, it's easier here because it's a tropical environment, so there's a lot more moisture and it's easier to ferment. So you would hang the tobacco off the ceiling in clusters of six or eight and try to keep them together and just allow the process to occur. Just allow them ferment. If you get too much piled on top of themselves, and that's what the native people said. They said, The white man's tobacco is moldy. And they're right. You're fermenting it too much, and it's overly fermented. So what ends up happening is you get really harsh, raspy notes in it, which most people go, I don't touch tobacco because they think that's what tobacco is. And that's almost all tobacco products on the market. You smoke my tobacco and it's smooth. And people go, What's going on?

[00:54:26.740] - Speaker 2
How do you smoke it without smoking it? How do you smoke it without having smoke in your lungs?

[00:54:31.010] - Speaker 1
Well, you can puff it if you want to do it that way. But the best way to ingest tobacco for health purposes is to snuff it, which means wrap hay up the nose. You basically have it. That's the old system in the Amazon where somebody sits there with a… They have a little tube, like a bamboo tube, and go, up one nostril and then up the other nostril. That's really epic, actually. That's the best and that's the most natural.

[00:54:53.050] - Speaker 2
It seems like that would hit hard.

[00:54:55.040] - Speaker 1
It hits hard. Tobacco is known to activate the frontal cortex, and this is why tobacco is so associated with longevity, they believe, because the frontal cortex is activated by crossword puzzles. We know the relationship between word puzzles and longevity and keeps your brain active. Then the Rappé idea is you blast it right there. It's right to the crib reform plate that's connection. It's blood-brain barrier. I never was into tobacco. I never knew anything about. I grew up in cannabis culture, Southern California, surfer kid, cannabis culture. The idea of tobacco was as foreign as anything could be. Then one time doing ayahuasca about 25 years ago, drinking ayahuasca in upstate New York with some friends. The tobacco spirit is like, You're going to grow the best tobacco ever. I was like, What? What are you talking about? I didn't know concept. Then it just started. Things just started happening. A friend of mine brought me two tobacco plants, and the synchronicity was there, and I was like, Okay, I'm going to get into it. Then I just kept going deeper into it. What a story. I could go on and on. I think tobacco is the most amazing, by far the most interesting plant on Earth.

[00:56:00.850] - Speaker 1
My favorite. I'm a huge plant, guys. You probably imagine. By far the favorite of all of them. Really? Yes.

[00:56:10.210] - Speaker 2
Tell me more, why would that be?

[00:56:11.800] - Speaker 1
The flower, the way it sneaks up on you. This is really interesting. The way I originally started growing tobacco on our farm is I would just put it in all the pots in the nursery, whatever we were growing. Say we were sprouting up cacao trees or avocados or whatever we were growing in there with all the pots, I'd throw in tobacco seeds. Then it would come up wanted to. Then when we go plant the trees out in the yard, tobacco would grow there, and then sometimes it would move to some other spots. But inevitably, it all migrated right up to the house, right on the corner where we sit. We sit on the Lanai above, and it's growing down there in an L-shape below. Eventually, I was talking to an Amazonian shaman about it. He's like, Oh, yeah, no, the tobacco wants to listen to you. You have to grow at work and hear you. I was like, What? That's amazing. Amazing. It's a miracle. It's like, I could take you to there and I'd show you. I never planted it. You didn't plant it there. This is where it's growing.

[00:57:06.760] - Speaker 2
It moved there.

[00:57:07.480] - Speaker 1
It moved there. Those things tell you a lot. It really does. The plant consciousness of tobacco is like, it's really important right now, and the lies are coming apart. This whole thing about nicotine. Nicotine is the most powerful medicine. It's not addictive. What's addictive in tobacco is pyrazines. What the tobacco companies have been doing is spiking with pyrazine and burn agents like potassium, nitrate, and 800 different chemicals that they've added in. The longest of people in the world are always tobacco smokers. They're not smoking the crap that's sold in cigarettes and all that. Almost always grew their own. Why is such a difference? So when you start zeroing in on tobacco, you start realizing this is the zero point, actually.

[00:57:51.720] - Speaker 2
Which the native cultures all knew.

[00:57:53.760] - Speaker 1
They all knew. We're becoming aware. The real thing is that, let's say you ingest tobacco as an animal. Let's say you do tobacco as you drink it, which is dangerous, but it can be done. It's an emetic, but very powerful. Detoxifier has to be done under supervision. Or let's say you do a rapae. Or let's say you smoke it. Takes your prayers right to heaven. That's it. Takes your prayers right to heaven. And your prayers are heard. And that's the whole thing. Once you understand that. And so the whole attack on tobacco has been about distorting that. It's all about breaking down that connection. Takes your straight to creator. I'm telling you, all the years- Have you ever vaped it? You can vape it, sure. You could press it into... I have friends who are really in the cannabis business, and they know how to get down to these raisins that are all without chemicals and all this other stuff. I'm sure you could do that with tobacco, but to me, that's not my jam. My jam is I like smoking tobacco. I like making smudge sticks with tobacco. I like Rappé, which is or hape, which is the tobacco up the nose.

[00:59:01.200] - Speaker 1
Those are my preferred ways. But I also like just sharing the knowledge about it and just getting people's interest about it because there's something the human race knows. They know. We're not getting the right story here.

[00:59:14.000] - Speaker 2
It was supposed to be neuroprotective protective. Supposedly, it was harder for people to get COVID if they were smokers.

[00:59:19.500] - Speaker 1
That's right. Yeah, because it takes up the acetylenecholinesterase receptor site, the nicotine does. The nicotine will block the COVID from getting into that receptor site. That's That's actually what I did through the whole COVID thing, actually. I basically smoked tobacco through the whole thing. I just somehow got word of that early on, and I think it was from before, actually.

[00:59:40.130] - Speaker 2
Maybe the tobacco told you.

[00:59:41.640] - Speaker 1
It could be.

[00:59:42.390] - Speaker 2
It's listening.

[00:59:43.360] - Speaker 1
It's listening. After years of using the Sonic Bloom in my office, way back to like 30 years ago. What is that? Sonic Bloom is a technology where you play baroque music to plants, and then the plants open up and then you spray them with a seaweed solution, like a gibralic acid solution, and then You can get crazy growth of plants. I grew 100 plants that way in my office just for fun. I noticed that the cacti never reacted to the music or anything, but the big leaf plants did. Then one day I was like, Oh, they're like ears. The leaf is like an ear. That really changed my life. Whenever I look at the tobacco today, I've got one that's just right below where I sit. Big ears. It's got big ears. I was just listening. I was like, You see what's going on up there? Wow. Yeah, really fun.

[01:00:30.210] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the quality of food available today in general, and if you want quality of food, where do you have to go to get it?

[01:00:38.550] - Speaker 1
I was listening to RFK speak, and he said something that was so profound. He's like, Yeah, we have the most toxic food, the most toxic dies and crap in our food. It's bad. It's as bad as it could be. But we also have the best regenerative farmers in the world. We have the best farmers in the world. We have the most advanced farmers on Earth, and he's right about The organic and biodynamic farmers that I know, it's incredible. Best ever. Some of those people sell into stores, but I'd say mostly if you're really wanting to get it, you got to go to the Internet. I was just with the Seetopia people I'm not a fish guy, but they have the certified parasite free, certified this free, certified mercury free, certified lead free, all the things. It's an internet site. I think it's seatopia. Fish. I was like, What a cool thing you guys are doing. Rad. It's the Internet.

[01:01:32.000] - Speaker 2
You're thinking the Joel Saliton's of the world?

[01:01:34.790] - Speaker 1
I love Joel Saliton. Me too.

[01:01:36.070] - Speaker 2
What a legend. Amazing.

[01:01:37.270] - Speaker 1
Amazing. Yeah. Because what he's done with his Polyface Farms is he's just created a new standard, which it's hard to train. If you're doing that work, I'm a farmer. I like being at home on my farm when I can be, unless I'm traveling to the next farm or doing something else. Building a business that markets into stores isn't my jam. I like just selling directly to the customer. That's what I like. It's just less time consuming. Chasing down stores for, You didn't pay this invoice. Forget it. Who wants to do that?

[01:02:09.180] - Speaker 2
The chances of it getting fresh to the user, it just slows down the process.

[01:02:15.130] - Speaker 1
Okay, speaking of which, these are fresh freeze-dried cacao beans. Look at that. It's so fresh. It vacuum-sealed in. Wow. Try one of those. You ever had those? No. Okay, so That's the rawest chocolate product and the freshest chocolate product you've ever had right there. That's raw chocolate.

[01:02:36.310] - Speaker 2
It looks like an almond.

[01:02:38.440] - Speaker 1
. Like an almond size.

[01:02:40.270] - Speaker 2
Like an almond size. Wow. Really interesting.

[01:02:49.240] - Speaker 1
That's for you, by the way. Thank you. That whole thing. Isn't that great? Isn't that cool? You see the crunch? You see the power? It's so fresh that it's not mealy in any way. It's got pop, it's got crunch, the flavor is there.

[01:03:04.220] - Speaker 2
How does this come off the plant?

[01:03:06.430] - Speaker 1
What's happening is we'll take a cacao pod like this, and then we're like oompa loompas in our little factory. We're cracking these things with a mallet, then it splits the pot open, and inside is the cluster of the beans, just like that, with the pulp on it.

[01:03:21.550] - Speaker 2
Are there different varieties?

[01:03:23.370] - Speaker 1
Yes. I'm a collector of such things. I'm sure I have the largest variety of genetics in Hawaii of cacao. I've got like 36 different genetic clusters of cacao. You'll see the difference between that and this, and you'd see how much different that one is, and then this one is different again.

[01:03:41.750] - Speaker 2
Very different color, different size. Different colors.

[01:03:43.610] - Speaker 1
Feel the weight on that one. Wow. Yeah, so it's got... That's an orange there. Anyway, so the original idea of all this is we crack it open, then we get it into this freeze-dried form here, and then we just send it directly to our customers. The idea there is that when you get one these, you're also getting a mix of all this. The way I got into cacao, I was in Maui, this is back like 28 years ago, something like that. A friend of mine, he gave me three cacao beans. I had no idea. I didn't eat chocolate. I wasn't into candy. I was a health food maniac, all this stuff. I said, What do you do with these? He's like, Oh, you just peel it, throw it in your spiraling a coconut drink and blend it and off you go. That's what we did for a few years with them when they show up. Friends were making little cacao bean batches. Then eventually, One day, my friend Eli said, Have you ever just eaten one? I said, No. He said, Eat the next one. I pealed the next one and just ate it. My life changed.

[01:04:39.390] - Speaker 1
I was like, What is this? What do you got to be kidding me? It's delicious. It's beyond. It's beyond anything. That created a raw chocolate revolution. We don't need all that. Because imagine I came to you all the years and I was like, Hey, Rick, here's almond oil. Hey, here's almond powder. Hey, here's almond butter. Then one day, you're like, Can I actually have an almond? Then I give you an almond. You're like, What the hell? That's how it is for chocolate. It's like all of us, all our lives, ate a processed form of chocolate. Right now, today, you have the raw form you can get. That's as fresh as it gets. Fresh, freeze-dried, biodynamic, certified organic chocolate. Amazing. It pops. It's just amazing. But the thing that was interesting that turned me on that day that I got turned on, I got switched on, there was a bean that switched me on. This is getting back to the magic idea. This idea of the rags to riches story, this idea of the golden ticket is intrinsic to the substance. It's intrinsic to chocolate. What I'm doing is we're taking all our genetic varieties in all parts of our land and we're mixing them together into Every batch that goes out because one of those is the golden ticket.

[01:05:49.920] - Speaker 1
Somebody will eat one of those and they'll get switched on and they'll have the idea that will save their business. They'll have their idea that will amplify their marriage or they'll have their idea that will get their kid through their university education or whatever, however it looks like, because chocolate is a magical substance.

[01:06:08.920] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the relationship between chocolate and coffee.

[01:06:11.590] - Speaker 1
Oh, God, what a beautiful relationship that is. They grow together really well. Chocolate is a tree/bush. It's not a giant tree. It's not like a mango. It will never get that big. It will never get these giant African tulips and things we have here in Hawaii. But coffee is truly a bush. It It does really good as a hedge. We grow vanilla on our cacao and on our coffee. Actually, there's vanilla for you. That's fresh vanilla, actually. Yeah, take a whiff of that. Wow. Now, that's fresh. You should probably leave the top off because it's like a fresh fruit. You can't leave it in a container too long because it'll mold because it's that fresh. It's just right off the farm.

[01:06:54.140] - Speaker 2
Amazing.

[01:06:55.100] - Speaker 1
Anyway, it is a good trellis. Coffee is a good trellis for vanilla. I love coffee fruits, right? So this is my take on it. This is just my spiel on this. The coffee bean is a seed. It's a seed of a fruit. It's a seed of the coffee cherry. And the coffee chairs are good. It's a good fruit. And when you eat both of them, it It's like a superfood for farmers. Let's say we're out in the yard and the coffee fruits are hidden. I might eat two or three, the whole thing, the fruit and the seed, and you get all the caffeine, you get everything. But it's all connected to the Earth. It's all connected It's connected to what's happening right there. It's all part of the farming experience. When you take that seed out and then you roast it and you separate it from that farming environment, it still has that diligence. It still has that, let's get to work. It still has that, let's get creative. It's still there, but it's separated from nature. I'm not a coffee person, but I'm definitely a coffee cherry person. I love it the fresh way.

[01:07:57.870] - Speaker 2
We were talking about the quality of food today.

[01:08:00.370] - Speaker 1
Yeah. It's the extremes. From the top to bottom is the most extreme possible, which I get how toxic everything is. I've been an environmentalist my whole life and all this stuff. But I also see that I'm also an advocate I could have choice. I really am.

[01:08:16.910] - Speaker 2
If you can get the thing you want, you can get the thing you want. You have to know that it's available and where to look. Right.

[01:08:23.700] - Speaker 1
Whatever it is that you like, the quality of that thing is at a level today in the world somewhere. Somebody's doing it the best you've ever seen, the best you've ever imagined.

[01:08:33.090] - Speaker 2
Is there a resource, like a codex or somewhere- Somewhere to go?

[01:08:36.850] - Speaker 1
Yeah. No, I don't know. We need that. We need that. I want that. That's a really good point. I want that. Yeah, to be able to go and say, Okay, where do I... I try to do that with my social media, for example, I tried to... Social media to me today, I have huge social media because I'm a people person. I really, actually, really enjoy just the insanity of people and just how crazy it can get. I got yelled at the other day because I was at a store and we were talking about the Los Angeles fires, and I was like, the San Ines Reservoir was empty. I got this woman like, You can't say that. She started yelling at me, and I was like, It was empty. What are you talking about? But that's part of the human- People were angry that it was empty, or were they angry that you said it was empty? They were angry at me. She was angry at me for saying it.

[01:09:22.780] - Speaker 2
For saying it was empty, even though it was empty. Yeah.

[01:09:25.710] - Speaker 1
I said it was empty, and it could have been... The fire hydrants She ran dry. We need help. She just was, I don't know. But that's part of the human experience. It made my day in a certain way because it was just so bizarre. I'm a people person like that. Anyway, with social media, you're probably a similar age to me. We came from the era of Reader's Digest and National Enquiry and that stuff. I'm not Elvis, sightings, that thing. But I'm a Reader's Digest type person, so I try to inject that into all the social media in a certain It's like, to me, this is the new Reader's Digest. I realized recently, I was like, You know what? I should just affiliate with things that aren't what I do because I'm always advertising what I do, but my audience is everybody. I started thinking, I should just go like the seatopia. Fish people. I'm going to start affiliating with them because they got the best thing ever for people who want that. People want red light therapy. There's crazy stuff out there. I was like, I know the best people in that world. Let me put that out there.

[01:10:27.840] - Speaker 1
It's like one of those, Duh, what was I thinking? I'm running a magazine, basically. That's what social media is. If I'm going to have ads, let's make it diverse instead of just about my chocolate products or something.

[01:10:39.700] - Speaker 2
Tell me all the different products you make now.

[01:10:42.500] - Speaker 1
We make a lot. At this farm, we have certified organic, certified biodynamic, all products, all the things that I'm going to mention. Tobacco, which we don't sell but will soon. We're working on that because I got the sacredtobacco. Com. Oh, that's great. That's really a good one. That's great. I love that. Tobacco is sacred, and it's holy, and the way it's been abused, it's coming to a course correction, and I'm there for that.

[01:11:05.590] - Speaker 2
What form will you sell it in?

[01:11:07.420] - Speaker 1
It'll be like this. It'll be like a- A jar. A jar with vanilla beans in it and freeze-dried cacao. We do Noni powder. We do honey. Our biggest thing is our noni land honey is coming upon. It's 19 years now, soon to be 20 years. You can see how runny it is. It's almost like a maple syrup. That's tropical honey. They're like that. This is our biggest product. This is the straight. The straight. The straight honey. The straight honey. What else do we do? We do Soursop. We do Soursop with its cancer-fighting abilities and things. We've done those products in the past. We're going to get back into doing them again. We make a Noni root product. That's a quinone product. It's the nicotine receptor, the mitochondrial receptor. The nicotine receptor, by the way, I said this for years to the cannabis people out there. They're like, what about the cannabinoid receptors in the human body? The E1 and the E2 and all I'm like, Let me tell you something. The nicotine receptors, you have millions of times more nicotine receptors in your body than cannabis receptors. Every single cell in the mitochondria, it's a nicotine receptor.

[01:12:13.840] - Speaker 1
What hits that nicotine receptor is nicotine, NAD, NAD plus, NADH plus, NMNs, that's nicotine, derivatives, niacin, nicotine derivative, niacinamide, nicotine derivative, methylene blue hits that receptor. This is This is where the action is, and it's all based on the nicotine receptor. That's telling us something amazing about what nicotine really is. People ask me, what's the number one thing for the nicotine receptor, the number one nootropic, or the number one thing for longevity? It's nicotine. Always has been. And a nicotine is not addictive. That's a complete scam. If you just look closely, they put all of the tobacco executives back in the 1990s up in front of Congress. And if you were caught lying in front of Congress, some people have gotten away with it recently. But if you get caught lying in front of Congress, it's dangerous repercussions. And so they're asking, is nicotine addictive? They're like, no. That's testimony. If it was addictive, those people could have been arrested and thrown in prison for lying to Congress. But it's not addictive. It's the pyrazines that are addictive. That's the thing that they've been also adding in more of and all the chaos that goes on.

[01:13:23.970] - Speaker 2
Have you experimented with copper for agricultural use?

[01:13:26.970] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Electroculture? I'm an electroculture maniac.

[01:13:29.960] - Speaker 2
In fact- Explain it all to me from the beginning. I know nothing about it.

[01:13:33.410] - Speaker 1
Okay, so part of what's going on with a plant is that the plant is trying to gather electrons from the atmosphere and bring them into the root zone of the plant. So part of what's going on with the plant is it is actually an antenna for electrons. And part of the nourishment of a plant is electrons. So what you're doing with electrocultures, you're basically connecting the heavens and the Earth with a copper wire. And if the wire A wire. Either way. Okay. Either way is good because I know that many things can be conducted down metal wires that are not named. That's from direct and personal experience. There are many things that can be conducted down wires that are of certain shapes. That's why antennas are in certain shapes because they're more able to catch things. The spiral shape, for example, to me, is really the best. You could take a copper tube and stick it in the ground. What I do sometimes, and I've done this on our spring, I was talking about that seep in spring in the front yard, is I filled it with layers of sand and carbon, charcoal and quartz crystals, and all kinds of and shungite, and all kinds of things.

[01:14:38.040] - Speaker 1
Then stuck that in the ground with a crystal at the bottom to seal it and a crystal at the top to seal it. It's a copper tube, it's a copper pipe with all that stuff in it and then put that right into the spring just to see maybe that's going to stimulate more productivity out of the spring or whatever. Still an experiment, and it's running right now. I'm not sure if it's working or not, but fun to look at. But generally, I do the spirals because the Ether forces and even probably almost everything, if it's allowed to move freely like you'd see in a river, is spiraling at some level. I will use spiral patterns to pick it up.

[01:15:14.170] - Speaker 2
Does the spiral always go in one direction?

[01:15:16.800] - Speaker 1
I like the counterclockwise spiral, personally. Why is that? I just... Like, clockwise is going downwards and counterclockwise is moving up. If you're looking up, it's going counterclockwise. But if you're looking down, it's going clockwise.

[01:15:31.430] - Speaker 2
Do you make the spirals or can you acquire spirals?

[01:15:35.030] - Speaker 1
There's people who make this stuff now you can get on Amazon. It's hilarious. People make it for you. They have these spiral electroculture. If you look up electroculture on Amazon now, there's people who make it these days.

[01:15:46.860] - Speaker 2
Electroculture spiral.

[01:15:48.320] - Speaker 1
There's all kinds of cool ones. But I did one right before coming over here. That was the last thing I did. I brought a San Pedro over to the house, and it's San Pedro, Wachuma, the famous Psyhodele cactus of Peru that has trouble surviving in our jungle. I have it under the house, and I was like, Okay, I'll see if I can make it. I thought, Oh, I throw an electroculture in it. I made it last night and put it in this morning in the pot. Amazing. Generally, I don't do a lot of electroculture outside of pots in Hawaii because the mona is so high. I mean, jeez, I want things to grow faster and better. It's already out of control. Understood. You're right. It's already out of control. Do you ever pray over the plants? Yeah, always. We do prayers. We just Canada, on the big island, we just planted six more lippet variety of ulu or breadfruit. The lippet variety is the one that we were missing on our orchard over there. We're gearing up to supply the world with ulu or breadfruit from the big Island, which is the best in the world.

[01:16:47.300] - Speaker 1
Now you go to a restaurant in some great resort somewhere in Tiji or something, and they'll have it frozen in their freezer. So all the cooks can be like, You want Big Island? Ulu, we got it. We got it in the freezer. We're gearing up for that on the big level. So when you ask me what I grow, I don't just grow on this island. I also have a really awesome farm on the big island.

[01:17:06.620] - Speaker 2
Anything on the mainland?

[01:17:08.070] - Speaker 1
Yes. Well, in Ontario, Canada. And I've also farmed in Texas, and I farmed in, of course, California for years and years. And I just love every one of those ecosystems for their own magic that they have. Nothing compares to Hawaii, of course. It's just this is a whole magnitude of magic.

[01:17:22.670] - Speaker 2
Why is so much food brought in here versus grown here?

[01:17:26.290] - Speaker 1
Ignorance. It's ignorance. The big island, just growing like ulu and avocados, we could feed all in North America just the avocados coming off the big island. If we really wanted to, if you're really geared up, we could produce more big island avocados and ship it to the mainland than Michal Wacan produces in Mexico and ships to the United States easily. It's just politics and state of California doesn't want the avocados coming over because, Oh, what if we get pests? They've got a monopoly. The trade organizations of avocado in California They got a lock on it. They lobby to make sure that you can't get the real like these guys, these giant avocados. Imagine those come into California. They can come into California every single day, but they won't allow it. They'll let the charwils come in as long as you've done this paperwork and that paperwork and crossed this T and dotted that I and all that stuff. But with Ulu, it's open now. On the big island, we just planted six of them. We finally got the lipid variety that we wanted, and we prayed over those, and we had a beautiful circle.

[01:18:28.150] - Speaker 2
Do you ever sing to them?

[01:18:29.510] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Sure. Again, if I'm trying to get them to root, I'm going down. I'm going, you want to go deeper. Then if you wanted them to shoot up, you want to go up. That's what I learned from the alchemy books, and that's what I learned from Victor Schauberger. Do you know who Victor Schauberger is? He was the great Austrian water Wizard, probably the real inventor of the jet engine. They stole it from him. They stole all that from him. He talked about when he'd walked the old country in Austria, there were still people who would spoil the water one way and they'd go up when they were going counterclockwise, and they'd go down when they're going clockwise in pitch, up and down. And then Steiner talks about that, too, and I was like, okay. So I got it from a few different sources.

[01:19:14.290] - Speaker 2
So So even the stuff that Steiner is known for may have older sources. Sure, 100%. He didn't necessarily invent all the ideas.

[01:19:24.450] - Speaker 1
No, he somehow was an aggregator of information, and he was a clairvoyant plant in some way. So he's aggregating information from the old world, the old world wisdom.

[01:19:36.730] - Speaker 2
Any great books on electroculture?

[01:19:38.950] - Speaker 1
Good question. Is there anything on electroculture right now that's out there? Maybe there's something new. It's really a new thing. I mean, if you go back to Christoflo, who's the inventor of the concept, his books are out there and you can get them. You can download them for free online. And there's about six of them, something like that.

[01:19:56.710] - Speaker 2
Where was he from?

[01:19:57.380] - Speaker 1
And he was French. He was A genius. And what he basically discovered, and what we're rediscovering now, is that the plant, you can alleviate a burden from the plant by using electroculture wands. So what you're trying to do is you're taking, let's just say I have a chopstick and I have a little sprouting plant happening. I can wrap a copper wire around that chopstick, and I can stick it one-third of the way into the soil, and it will assist that plant in growing. It'll help. Copper is generally the one that's-Not touching the plant, just going into the soil. Although I have done, for example, I was basically taking grape material. This is in Ontario, I wasn't on this farm. I was taking grapes and I was trying to clone it. I was trying to get it to root, and I wrapped it like the piece, the stick, the scion, whatever. The cutting. I wrapped it in copper and it worked. It frigging worked. I was like, wow. That's great. It was wild. I was like, wow, this is something. Copper itself is a dewormer. It's antimicrobial to a significant degree. An electronic tractor. Also, and I've been doing experiments with having copper on one side and then zinc on the other, there's a big deception that's placed at various levels of alchemy.

[01:21:11.220] - Speaker 1
And that's a trick that you're supposed to overcome at each layer of alchemy. Because We're coming to a time where I think it's important. The most overt first step trick that's been laid by previous alchemists is that Jupiter is associated with the element of tin. It's actually Zinc. It's obvious, actually. The alchemical metal that is associated with Jupiter is Zinc, not tin. That makes a lot of sense when you start going, Oh, yeah, because when you get Zinc, let's say you have a soil medium. Let's say it's a great medium that's made. I use a lot of beach sand in my mixes, for example, when I'm making soils up to Sprout trees, and we're up in a clay pot up there. The soil gets really dense and doesn't breathe, so I have to get things in there that will separate pieces of wood, sand is really good. Vermiculate is excellent, perlite is excellent, and it opens it up so that there's more breathing. But when I'm doing that, of course, if I'm bringing sand from the beach, I'm going to have salts in there. If I put zinc, let's say I put a zinc electroculture on one side and I put a copper on the other, there's a current between them.

[01:22:18.040] - Speaker 1
And that's an interesting thing. It's like a battery. It's a real live battery. And that tells us this thing about Jupiter and Aphrodite, right? Jupiter and Venus. They had a thing.

[01:22:28.830] - Speaker 2
Really interesting. Have you had any mentors along the way?

[01:22:32.760] - Speaker 1
Many. Many great mentors, many great alchemist mentors. I have a great German alchemist friend of mine who's... This guy is so beserk. He will literally not stop talking and educating you for seven days straight. You'll just love every bit of it. Just like, Okay, tell me about this. Okay, what about this? What about that? How about this? Okay, what about this? How about that? Anything. Steiner, alchemy, electroculture. What's the true nature of copper? Tell me about the Saternian plants. You name it. He's that guy. Of course, I'm a big faster, and so I'm coming up to a two-week water fast. It's going to be tough because this food is so good.

[01:23:12.220] - Speaker 2
How often do you fast?

[01:23:14.220] - Speaker 1
I fast four times a year.

[01:23:15.630] - Speaker 2
Tell me the benefits and are there any negatives to fasting?

[01:23:20.770] - Speaker 1
Well, you have to go at your own pace. The negative is just like we were talking about with detox earlier. You can't go too crazy, too quick. It can hurt you because it's too much, too quick. You got to slow. I recommend that people start with intermittent fasting and then work their way into a single day of fasting, and then eventually two days of fasting, then a long weekend, three days. You have to work and experience it because it's a tough practice.

[01:23:42.160] - Speaker 2
What's the difference between a water fasting and a dry A dry fast.

[01:23:45.710] - Speaker 1
A dry fast is when you consume nothing. No water, nothing goes in your mouth. I love dry fasting, but that's another one that you have to be experienced because it's dangerous, very dangerous to just take somebody... We don't know someone's health history, and God knows The toxins we've been exposed to, it's crazy. It's insane. Nature's solution to pollution is dilution. So water, water, water, water, water in the way. I've learned over the years, and I learned this from a very interesting character, a guy who lived without food for years, and he lived with me. By the way, when someone who doesn't eat food lives with you, it crushes your belief systems. It crushes them. It's like you're like, whoa. And not only that, the energy coming off such a being is it's beserk. It's incredible. And that being taught me that if I drink salt water, then eventually I can get my body into homeostasis and I'm in balance so then I don't need anything from the outside because my body is a self-nourishing, self-regenerating community of cells. Okay, so let's just take the extreme example of someone dying of starvation. Well, they're bathing in their own waist and they're malnourished.

[01:25:03.630] - Speaker 1
They never got to a balanced nutrition, plus they're bathing in their own waist. If you can get the waste products out, get to a balanced nutrition, which ultimately comes down at the very basic level to water and salt. When I say water and salt, I'm talking about a sea salt, a full spectrum salt, or a Himalayan salt, or a salt that is actually a salt that comes from the earth, a real thing.

[01:25:22.980] - Speaker 2
We're talking about a pinch, not a lot of salt.

[01:25:25.020] - Speaker 1
It depends on the person. Now, I found out for me, I had to go illegal on it because I It found out for me something crazy, which is a shocker, and I'm glad I'm able to even mention this. Tell me. Which is saltwater actually ended and completely obliterated over years of time, all my allergies, and I had many. I had many. I had hay fever, I had food allergies, I had this and that. I would get into certain people's houses with dogs or cats. My lungs would fill up with fluid. I mean, terrible allergies. Eventually, I got the hint of it from Dr. Batman Galich's book, Your Body's Many for Water. In there, he starts talking about salt and how it neutralizes asthma. Then step by step by step, in my own experience, I started going, Oh, I'm starting to get an itchy in the back of throat. Drink saltwater, gone. Started getting itchy eyes, drink saltwater, gone. Asthma. The water is gone. I started going, Oh. I started doing more salt. What's the dose? One teaspoon per liter. That's a good starting point. You may need less than that, but you may be like me where you need more.

[01:26:30.400] - Speaker 2
When you say a teaspoon, flat teaspoon?

[01:26:32.370] - Speaker 1
Flat teaspoon per liter. Then what happened to me, which is I had to go to two tablespoons. Then I started realizing, the saltier the water is, the quicker it stops the asthma or the allergy. It stops it quick. It just became a whole philosophical realization that the reason why people die of starvation, the reason why people can't fast, or the reason why they're having trouble in this world with all this assault of toxins is because salt is an incredible neutralizer of foreign proteins. Crazy level. Insane level, actually. It changed my life. I realized with the fasting, if I just had a little bit of sea salt, it was okay. But if I had a lot, then I was hydrated. I didn't need to have anything, actually. I was balanced. I actually had... I was hydrated. Because if you have too much salt, obviously, you're going to get dehydrated. But if you have too little, you'll get dehydrated. If you have too much water, you'll get dehydrated. If you have too little, you'll get dehydrated. It's all of It's the balance of it all. That tells us something- You can only find out through doing it.

[01:27:34.610] - Speaker 1
That's it. I first saw this in Aristotle, but everything is a balance of forces. You can't just say, Okay, we're going to do this now. Now we're virtuous. It's not like that. Virtu is a balance of forces, and health is a balance of forces.

[01:27:49.980] - Speaker 2
If I start with a teaspoon per liter, how would I know whether to increase or decrease? What would be the result that would tell me I I need more or I need less.

[01:28:01.760] - Speaker 1
The best time to do these experiments is in the morning when everything's clear, and then you drink the saltwater and then you see what happens. Now, if you have a really good reaction- You drink the whole liter at once?

[01:28:10.810] - Speaker 2
.

[01:28:11.370] - Speaker 1
Wow. Yeah, drink it down. Because when you drink it down, it also, when you have salt in it, it acts as a big bolus and it moves down your intestines and it pushes everything out. You have a good bowel movement. That can get people off coffee because people are a lot of times using coffee in the morning because they're trying to stimulate a bowel movement. The salt will do that. Then the next thing is you start going, Okay, am I thirsty or not? Am I in balance or not? Then you might go, Okay, let me see where my allergies or my asthma is or any food allergy. Because salt, over time, I realized, ultimately, what's an allergy? It's just an irritation. What's an irritation? It's dehyd. Ultimately, if we got down to the cellular level, why is the tissue irritated? It's dehydrated. Can we rehydrate that tissue with just water? Not possible, in my opinion, because you need both. You need water and salt for hydration. Every creature on Earth has their own isotonic balance of water and salt. It's different for every person, too. I'm a desert dweller originally, and a cold weather desert person.

[01:29:15.490] - Speaker 1
I just found out for me it was way more sea salt and salt in general than I ever thought I could ever have. Symptoms, for example, when somebody has a runny nose or they have a loose stool, that thing, low salt. I was just thinking, I was helping my mom. My mom was having this constantly runny nose and irritation of the eyes and drink saltwater, drink saltwater. She drank saltwater, it went away. And she's like, You know what? My Russian doctor, when I was five years old, told me to drink saltwater. The Russians, by the way, it's still part of their culture, this thing about the saltwater drinking.

[01:29:49.200] - Speaker 2
Doctors today tell you not to use salt.

[01:29:50.820] - Speaker 1
Yeah, it's emblematic of our civilization. We got so whacked out that we actually were like, salt is poison. That's how far out we went. And I was just going… It was a meta study on high blood pressure. I have it on my phone. I just was watching it yesterday, and it was a good summary. And they found out that the people who had the best blood volume and the best blood pressure consumed the most salt.

[01:30:17.730] - Speaker 2
Interesting.

[01:30:18.410] - Speaker 1
What an interesting thing. I was like, What a video. What the heck? What do you know?

[01:30:23.430] - Speaker 2
Do you use hydrogen peroxide for anything?

[01:30:25.670] - Speaker 1
I have. I mean, today I would use hydrogen peroxide mostly for cleaning things or purifying water if I had to in a pinch or something. But I'm more of an ozone person when it comes to oxygen therapies. Actually, I'm firing up for my household right now. We're firing up some ozone for tonight. We're going to do ozone enomas. Lovely. That's what's coming up. But with the fasting, the key to fasting is getting all this stuff out of your bowels. You have to get emptied out because you crave what's in your intestines. When it's emptied out, it's easier to fast and you can go longer. I'm in a scene, so I Over the years, basically people are like, You're in a scene. Here, this is your path. And part of that path is you have to fast on water every single... I'm 55 this year, so I have to fast on water 55 days this year.

[01:31:11.570] - Speaker 2
What else goes into being in a scene?

[01:31:13.730] - Speaker 1
Well, we have an orientation towards the spiritual. So always spirit first and physical last. And then we also have an orientation towards the heart, that it's heart-oriented, and it's also non-proselytizing. So the main thing about the Ascins is there's no proselytizing. You're not going to have somebody knocking on your door going, Have you read the Bible? Jesus is here to save you. We're not doing that.

[01:31:39.480] - Speaker 2
How did you become an Ascin?

[01:31:42.480] - Speaker 1
It's because the Ascins in San Diego, they saw what I was doing, and they're like, You're in a scene. You don't know it yet, but you are. And they just put the information in front of me.

[01:31:49.800] - Speaker 2
And they proselytized you.

[01:31:51.090] - Speaker 1
And they proselytized me. And so I was like, Oh, okay, interesting. It's not a pushy thing. They're not going to push it on you. It's just like, You don't know it yet, but you're in a scene. Here, just look at this. Eventually, I realized that that was my path. But the key is that this thing about the fasting and the prayer, that combination, that's crazy stuff. I just did a 35-day water fast. I did that in October, November, which that's crazy stuff. I did not eat anything, and I didn't even drink a lot of water for over a month.

[01:32:23.190] - Speaker 2
Do you use baking soda for anything?

[01:32:25.610] - Speaker 1
I like baking soda, and I do use it. I have consumed it. I like I like using it in cleaning. I like using it in my bathtub. I like using it in the fridge, of course. I'm not a super beserk baking soda guy. In that department, I'm more of a charcoal guy. I'm actually activated charcoal. Coalbiter charcoal is our charcoal. I love charcoal. My God, it's another rabbit hole we could go down. We're on a septic system. We're in the jungle, we're on a farm. When you start putting charcoal down the toilets, it just cleans everything out. All the odor's gone, everything's gone. It just purifies everything. Everything. Charcoal is a neutralizer. Charcoal is a deodorizer. Charcoal is a cleaner.

[01:33:06.650] - Speaker 2
Would you eat it if you had an upset stomach, or would you eat it because you always eat it?

[01:33:12.670] - Speaker 1
I always eat it, yeah. Daily? Daily. Today was a crazy day, but we went to the Zerck last night. Last night, we were playing music. I'm a drummer, so I love playing real live instruments in the jungle with our crew. You When we talk about highs, there's nothing to be higher. It's like, so we work all day, then we go hit the yard, then we play music. It's the greatest high known. Then we'll have some tobacco, we'll have some mezcal, and then get up in the morning, I'll take 10 charcoal, and I'm back to Normal and ready to work.

[01:33:46.300] - Speaker 2
Great.

[01:33:46.740] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[01:33:47.260] - Speaker 2
Do you drink tea?

[01:33:48.530] - Speaker 1
I love tea. What tea is it? Medicinal mushroom tea. Big. I'm a huge believer in medicinal mushrooms and mushrooms in general as a category of food for humanity.

[01:33:58.340] - Speaker 2
Let's talk about mushrooms. What do I I need to know about mushrooms.

[01:34:00.900] - Speaker 1
Okay, so first of all, mushrooms are almost the Wild West of Botany. There's probably, it's estimated about 28,000 mushrooms in Appalachia that are unnamed. That's a real high number, really high number. There's a lot out there that's unknown, which is cool. When we think about mushrooms, we think about magic mushrooms. I think probably the first mushrooms I ever had were magic mushrooms. I consumed enough magic mushrooms in my life that I cannot consume any of those anymore, ever. I have intense reaction immediately. I had my fun. But what is magic mushroom doing? It's helping them with our elocution. It improves our cognition. It improves our wit and our capability of one neuron connecting with another. It changes our worldview and can actually heal us of some of the dangerous worldviews of the materialism worldviews, which are dangerous to us. They could head us down a path of, Oh, I've got the most money or the most yachts or the most whatever. And that's not going to bring us fulfillment. So it helps heal that because it shows you the magical world. It shows you, Whoa, there's a lot more going on here than I thought.

[01:35:06.090] - Speaker 1
Then that eventually cascaded into culinary mushrooms, which is like the butt mushrooms you have on a pizza, which, by the way, are pretty darn medicinal and pretty damn good. There's some pretty strong estrogen-degrading compounds in just agaricus bisporus, which is the common mushroom you'd have on a pizza. Then it evolved into things like trumpet mushroom, boletes, porcini, king boletes, oysters, and things like that, those are phenomenal culinary mushrooms. If you're living in a place, not here, but let's just say a place like where I'm at in Ontario, Canada, that's a big part of our diet because that's what's growing there. That's the food that's there. Now, then you go to the next category, which is the medicinal mushrooms, which are mostly, not always, but 99%, 95% at least, tree mushrooms. They grow symbiotically with trees. They come out of trees, both living and dead trees. Some, like Rishi mushroom, which is the queen of all mushrooms, of medicinal mushrooms, can grow in a living and a dead tree. It grows in every ecosystem in the world. Every ecosystem I've ever been in that has a forest has Rishi mushroom in it, which says something and means something.

[01:36:19.670] - Speaker 1
Chagra mushroom, which is the king, only grows in the circumpolar regions of the northern hemisphere of the world, all but all around, from Finland to Iceland to Northern Canada, to Korea, to China, to all of Russia. What a substance that is. I mean, whoa. Chagra mushroom. These are, by the way, when you get into medicinal mushrooms, you're talking about immune system modulation. I do want to just point out and just say that it is possible to never be sick, never have a cold cough, flu, fever, anything. If you're on it, you have to be on top of your game, but it's possible if you're really on your game. Medicinal mushrooms are a big part of that game because they modulate immunity, and they change Change your immunity over time. Your immune system, they inform and modulate and change your immune system so that a year later, three years later, 10 years later, 15 years later, you're a different person. That's from experience. I read those in those books years ago. I've now put it into practice for 20 years. It's a fact. Your immune system changes. When you get into the big ones, like the Richies and the Chagas, those are the big powerhouses, and they have a big, broad host defense.

[01:37:27.290] - Speaker 1
They cover a lot of frequencies of different microbes that they defend you When you add in some of the other ones, like the turkey tails and Mitochis and Betulinus Pptoporus, the birch polyporus, that's a great one. Another favorite. And Fomys fomentarius. Then you get other frequencies. When you start putting all those together in a tea, like 10 different medicinal mushrooms, you're immune. You become immune. It's delicious and it's glorious. Right now, I've got two medicinal mushrooms going. I got a Trimides and Phalina's gilvus from the jungle behind my house. We picked them from there and then dry them out in the sun and then put them into the tea and put a few other herbs in there and you're good to go.

[01:38:07.610] - Speaker 2
Onions and garlic.

[01:38:08.690] - Speaker 1
Love onions and garlic, but I'm more of an onion person than a garlic person. Garlic can irritate me and it can unbalanced me. I think a lot of people are aware of that. Of course, the Vedic system is against garlic and onions for that reason. But I'm that guy who eats an onion straight. Are you that guy? I'm that guy. I love onions. I love onions. If you just think of the great spicy foods in the world, onion, peppers. What's life going to be like without those things?

[01:38:39.520] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the karma of foods.

[01:38:42.540] - Speaker 1
Food changes your karma. I'm a vegetarian living on the mountain over here in the jungle. That's a certain karma. It's going to put a certain thing in my destiny. There's going to be certain things I'm going to be into. I'm not going to be out on the fishing boats in the morning because I was on those tuna boats when I was a kid in San Diego. It's not my thing. Change your karma, your destiny, your fate. Choose wisely. Like you are, you're probably you're a qualitarian, right? Absolutely. It's so epic to be a qualitarian because you know you can take it one step further and you know it can go even one step further, and you're pushing yourself to go more and more and more. In my wheelhouse, like this tobacco, this stuff is the quality of this is like people smoke it and they go, Dude, what's going on? It's like that because it's smooth. There's nothing raspy about it. This is good, but if I was here, just like right now, the batch that I'm drying right now is going to be better than this batch because I'm here. It's a lot of times I'll pick at the last second, then it'll dry in my room when I leave, and when I come back, it's all ready, that thing.

[01:39:51.710] - Speaker 1
But it's a little bit better when I'm there the whole time as it's fermenting because I'm able to monitor it and get it perfect.

[01:39:58.740] - Speaker 2
Have you ever experienced experimented with an elimination diet?

[01:40:02.520] - Speaker 1
You mean like a gaps diet or just like a- No.

[01:40:04.700] - Speaker 2
Will you reduced to only eating one thing? Sure. And then add one thing back after a couple of weeks and just see how the different foods you eat Oh, yeah.

[01:40:15.760] - Speaker 1
I did monodiet. I ate fruit only for long periods. I don't even know how long I went on fruit. I went long a year. I experimented with not drinking water, only coconut water, and my food from plants. I have the approach that I have now for a reason because it led me back to this. I just feel like these things that we have, this idea of having eggs for breakfast, it's There's no reason. There's a reason for a reason.

[01:40:46.100] - Speaker 2
What got you back on eggs?

[01:40:48.610] - Speaker 1
I always liked eggs. I just did. I was never against them. I just went on another tangent for 20 years. As soon as I changed my diet around, I was like, eggs. I want to go back to eggs.

[01:41:00.230] - Speaker 2
Great.

[01:41:00.550] - Speaker 1
I love sunny-side up. I love hard-boiled eggs. I love scramble eggs. I love everything about eggs.

[01:41:07.880] - Speaker 2
Why in Chinese medicine do they suggest no raw food, only cook?

[01:41:12.240] - Speaker 1
Well, there's the damp spleen idea. And Really, okay, so this brings us really to the question of, I was a raw foodist for a long period of time, 17 and a half years. I did it. I lived it. Why is a human different than a creature in nature? We're animals. Why Why do we need to cook the food? And Rudolf Steiner said, is we have too much soul. I'm telling you, this is a deep, deep pondering thing. I pondered it for a long time and lived it and pondered it. We have so much soul that we're not as physically present like a bear is or as physically present as a like a wild hog or a wild boar here. We're just not as physically manifested. We're part in the spirit world. Therefore, our fires, it's hard to develop the agne, that fire to burn up the raw food.

[01:42:08.420] - Speaker 2
Very interesting.

[01:42:09.630] - Speaker 1
Very interesting idea. Yeah. To me, I've wrest with it for years. You can build it up, but it's difficult, and you have to really work at it. You have to work on the agne, the fire, the Ashtanga yoga, and just keep building it up. You have to be a type of person that has a very high amount of internal heat, which I do. I'm a cold-plungeing maniac. People are like, Let's go cold-plunge. I'll go in there for 15 minutes. I'm a maniac for that stuff because I have a high amount of internal heat. That's why raw food works for me. But that's a rarity.

[01:42:44.160] - Speaker 2
Tell me about ripeened olives.

[01:42:46.270] - Speaker 1
Oh, jeez. Oh, my God. You're touching on my favorite things ever. Now, I do spend part of every year in Greece. There are trees in Greece that are easily a thousand years old, olive trees. Olives have been associated with longevity all along. It's been known that olive oil consumers live an average of 9% to 18% longer across all mammals, including humans, which is a crazy, crazy thing. There's nothing like that in the entire field of all food or nootropics, the only thing that gets you to that level of longevity isn't even a food, which is charcoal in animal research. Charcoal extends life better than olive oil, which is an astounding by the way. That's why I'm big on both of those two things. If we could just have more life, we'll be wiser. If we could just have more life, we'll figure things out. That's my theory. To keep people on the Earth longer, they're more likely to figure it out. Then pass that wisdom down. Anyway, so the olives, when I was living in San Diego and I first got into the raw foods, I kept looking at the olive tree and I kept going, There's got to be something.

[01:43:53.780] - Speaker 1
You don't need to brine it. This whole thing of I got to process it. No, it's got to do it naturally. Then eventually, I realized that olives will do their thing in the autumn. Then they move through the winter and through, especially in the medish raining climates, you get a rainy season, which is the winter. The olives will either fall or be leached of their tannins on the tree or on the ground. Then you roll around to February, March, April, and either on the tree or on the ground, they will be shriveled up and ripe naturally, sun-riped naturally.

[01:44:25.450] - Speaker 2
Is this related to the time when they would be picked to make olive oil? Because there's a day. I'm told there's one day.

[01:44:33.590] - Speaker 1
Yet there's usually... It depends on what they're going for. Today, like these days, it's going to be a day in November. They're going after the, I would say, generally unripe olives because they're higher in polyphenols and they have a little bit more of the olioquanthal and those unique compounds and the oliorupine, which is really good, by the way. Oliorrupine, jeez, is that an important compound because it's an aromatase inhibitor. That's my number one thing for It depends on the breast cancer, of course, because each breast cancer is different. But the common estrogen-receptor-positive breast cancer, the main one, oliorupine, oliorupine, oliorupine, which is the iridoid yellow-green pigment that's in green olives. It's in olive oil, especially the November-picked olives for olive oil. Almost all of them are that. It's also found in olive leaf extract and an olive leaf, too. It could be olive leaf tea. Really important. I take it all the time, actually. I think it's one of the most important. I'm a Mediterranean being. Olive is my tree. It's more actually fundamental to my being than avocado is, actually. I'm just more genetically aligned to the olive tree.

[01:45:41.050] - Speaker 2
You let them fall off the tree and they ripen in the sun, and then you eat them just like that?

[01:45:45.750] - Speaker 1
It is so good. The Greeks, by the way, have a name for it. They call them the hamades.

[01:45:52.150] - Speaker 2
Do they taste salty still or no?

[01:45:54.420] - Speaker 1
No, they have a high amount of sodium in them naturally, the highest of any fruit, actually. But it's not Salty, salty. But it's there. It's like bone marrow. It's like a salty fat, naturally. To me, it is my bone marrow because I'm vegetarian. That's where I get it. It's an alkaline fat, too. The Greeks, they have this term, the hamades, the ones that have fallen, and they know about it, and you have to push them to start eating them again. But once they start eating them again, they're going into my bag and they're like, Can I have another one of those? They keep going back for more because it's a thing. Once you start eating them and you know, you're like, My God, if you're ever in Delphi and I'm not there, remember this. All around Delphi are olive trees that are 500 years old, 1,000 years old. It's insane. Right on the road. So they basically put rocks, flat rocks around them, too. So the olives that have fallen aren't in the dirt. They're on a rock. It's clean. And so you can go there and not a single person, not ever, ever, picks them.

[01:46:57.690] - Speaker 1
Zero. So I will go I'll get thousands of them. They're this big fat, real. Oh, my God, are they good? They're not like the olives here. They're bigger. They're more like an avocado. How long are they good for? See, they'll last forever. They don't go bad. They don't mold. You can store them. You can store them in a jar like that and seal them, and they release a gas that keeps them intact. They will not mold.

[01:47:22.900] - Speaker 2
That's unbelievable. They don't have to be refrigerated. Nope.

[01:47:26.380] - Speaker 1
Because I'm that guy who just like, I I want to know the truth about the olive tree. Eventually, I realized that once you have an olive tree, you will survive. Because with that, I can take that. I can make all kinds of things. I can make food from that. I can take all kinds of herbs and things, mix it with that, and be eating stuff and have a significant amount of calories. Really, the civilizations of the Mediterranean, the tree of life is the olive tree, because with that tree, you're surviving. It's so cool. The power of the hamades, the ones that have fallen, I mean, I can't wait. Now, the time to get those is like, if you're in Delphi, the time would be in, say, February, March, April, May. All through there, there's going to be good ones.

[01:48:10.070] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the quality of soil.

[01:48:13.570] - Speaker 1
Soil is the ecstatic skin of the earth. It's ecstatic. You know the power of going barefoot on the soil is just nothing like it. The power of going across your land that you've been working on for 20 years, barefoot. It's a high, it's a level of fulfillment. When you've broken up the clay pot that we were in originally, it was all grass and clay. To break it up naturally and to actually open the soil up and to put the canopy up above so the soil can breathe because it's not getting pushed down and congealed by the sun. The soil quality is the human quality, right? If the soil is your brain. What's happening with the soil is your consciousness. To create a healthy soil is to is to create a healthy human. I make soils. I love making soils. I'll go and I'll take some of our worst soils, and I mix them with beach sand, and I'll mix that with some of our best soils, and I mix that with things that the earthworms have turned over, and I'll mix that with some wood chips, and I'll mix that with debris from a tree that didn't make it, and bam, that's the medium.

[01:49:23.150] - Speaker 1
Then I'll sprout cacaus in there, or I'll sprout rollinia in there, or we'll sprout avocados, or we'll sprout nonis, or we'll sprout soursops.

[01:49:33.300] - Speaker 2
What do you know about pomegranates?

[01:49:35.410] - Speaker 1
A lot. I've grown pomegranates in many different ecosystems. I've grown pomegranates in the Arizona desert. I've grown pomegranates in Texas. I've grown pomegranates in Southern California. I've grown pomegranates here in Hawaii, and I'm half Persian. That's the fruit of Tehran. It can actually affect your blood chemistry like you did a workout. That's how good it is. That's the latest research It can actually affect your blood chemistry in the way that a good workout does.

[01:50:05.750] - Speaker 2
It was a myth that every pomegranate has the same number of seeds. I don't know that that's true.

[01:50:10.800] - Speaker 1
I don't know if that's true. That's a good question.

[01:50:13.440] - Speaker 2
It's a good myth, though.

[01:50:14.490] - Speaker 1
I love the idea. We're going to have to count those things up. The way we do it, like the Persian way, is you get a big bowl and you just open them all up. You just open them all. You just get a bowl full of all the seeds and you just start chomping them down rather than trying to get through the fruit and all the all the layers of the skin layers and things that are in there.

[01:50:33.000] - Speaker 2
It's a little too- Do you do it with a spoon or with your hands?

[01:50:35.830] - Speaker 1
Hands.

[01:50:36.490] - Speaker 2
Do you spit out the pits or you chew up and swallow the pits?

[01:50:39.200] - Speaker 1
I spit out the pits. Everybody always says that to me. They're like, How come you spit out the pits? Because I've eaten a lot of pomegranates in my life, and It's a little heavy on my intestines. I would also say that, and people do need to be more... You need to be careful about pomegranate pits for that reason. It can get stuck in your intestines. But even worse, a bigger offender is the tunas or the nopale fruits. It's a cactus fruit, but it's very spiny, and then they turn red right at the last... They call them tunas in South America. You'll see them on this island. There's a lot of them here. The seeds of those, they can be an irritant on the intestines, so I recommend spitting those out. It's a relative of dragon fruit. Do we love dragon fruits and patayas? I mean, that's another amazing. My God, those are awesome.

[01:51:25.580] - Speaker 2
Do you think of yourself primarily as a farmer?

[01:51:28.360] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I'm a farmer. Summer. Yeah, I do. It was really, really difficult for me when I was younger to not have a piece of land. I was like, I have to get on the land fast and soon because I was literally dragging pots of plants around with me, even from one place to another.

[01:51:47.280] - Speaker 2
What percentage of the food you eat is food that you grow?

[01:51:51.710] - Speaker 1
Right now, it's 100%. Every now and then, you go to this health store, it's like a social thing. I don't eat any food from there, but It's fun to go see your friends and things. But I love just the avocados from your own land, the olives from your own land, the berries from your own hand. It's fulfillment. It really is. This is an energy that I think needs to be talked about more. It's like there's a level of fulfillment about it. It's not happiness. That's not a complete enough concept. It's not like achievement. That's also It's not complete enough. It's embodied. It's more wholesome. It's more complete. We have this one avocado tree that's just so good, man. It's like one of those dry avocados that it's not watery or wet at all. It's really dry and fatty. Just think of the day I planted that thing up in the forest. It's up in the jungle. It's actually off our property. It's up in the jungle up there. It's just kicking them out. Kicking them out. Tetragrammatin is a podcast. Tetragramatin Tetragrammatin is a website. Tetragrammatin is a whole world of knowledge. What may fall within the sphere of Tetragrammatin?

[01:53:47.140] - Speaker 1
Counterculture? Tetragrammatin. Sacred geometry? Tetragrammatin. The Avant-garde? Tetragrammatin. Generative art? Tetragrammatin. The Tarot? Tetragrammatin. Out-of-print music? Tetragrammatin. Biodynamics, tetragrammatin, graphic design, tetragrammatin, mythology and magic, tetragrammatin, obscure film, tetragrammatin, Beach Culture, tetragrammatin, esoteric lectures, tetragrammatin, off the grid living, tetragrammatin, alt, spirituality, tetragrammatin, the canon of fine objects. Tethra Grammatin. Muscle cars. Tethra Grammatin. Ancient wisdom for a new age. Upon entering, experience the artwork of the day. Take a breath and see where you are drawn. Tetragrammatin. Com.
