Benedikt Taschen 
Quick Facts: 
Benedikt Taschen is a German publisher and contemporary art collector. 
He is the founder and managing director of the publishing house Taschen, one of the most successful international publishers, with illustrated publications on a range of themes including art, architecture, design, film, photography, pop culture, and lifestyle. 
An avid comic book collector, he opened his own store at the age of 22. Several years later, he made the transition to the art book business. 
He is known for his hands-on approach to his work and his willingness to give artists the freedom to create their own visuals. 
He has collaborated with figures as Philippe Starck, Helmut Newton, and Rem Koolhaas. 
Benedikt Taschen: from selling comics in Cologne to hanging out with Hockney | The Art Newspaper (November 5, 2020) 
The 59-year-old Benedikt Taschen, the legendary founder of the book publisher Taschen, started his business on his parents’ kitchen table in Cologne more than four decades ago. Today, it is one of the dominant global brands in art publishing. 
The son of doctors and the youngest of five children, Taschen, a self-described lonely child with a fascination for Donald Duck comic books, began a mail-order comic book service at the age of 12. When the first comic book price guide was published in Germany in 1976, Taschen “became aware that other people were collecting”. 
“Most of them were 10, 15, 20 years older than me. For many of them, they were collecting because they wanted to buy the lost dreams of their childhood,” he explains. “When I learned of this, I started to buy comics that weren’t interesting for me but I knew [people] would collect.” 
The teenage Taschen would post comics to a network of around 200 people. “There were no credit cards or bank transfers,” he remembers. “The mailman would bring us the cash in the morning.” 
In 1980, the day before his 19th birthday, Taschen opened his comic book shop in Cologne. From the outside, he looked like the 
precocious young entrepreneur. But for the first four years, he struggled to survive. He recalls long car journeys across Germany “hunting for old treasures”, attending dreary comic conventions and the disappointment of long drives to collectors who promised troves of riches but in fact had an attic full of wastepaper. 
Things changed in 1984 at an American trade show when Taschen discovered a tranche of 40,000 books on the Belgian artist René Magritte. With money borrowed from his aunt, he purchased the collection for a dollar each, and set about selling them individually for 9.99 Deutsche Marks—approximately $6.60. Within a few months, he had sold them all. 
Today, as Taschen prepares to celebrate 40 years of trading, the business is jointly run with his eldest daughter, Marlene, and comprises around 200 employees, 13 bookshops, and offices in Cologne, London, Paris, Los Angeles and Hong Kong. Thousands of editions of books have been produced and sold, including the most expensive book in history, the famous Helmut Newton Sumo—so called for its gargantuan size. After its publication in 1999, and in an interview with Vanity Fair magazine, Newton said of Taschen: “There are very few like him. Or there are none like him. He is also, I might add, a madman.” Is Newton’s comment fair? “It’s for sure a correct assessment,” Taschen says. “My career is all about planting seeds.” 
Taschen first came across Newton’s photographs in the 1970s, but it was not until 1985 that they first met, for breakfast at the Savoy Hotel in Berlin. “I wanted to present to him an idea of a big book of his nudes and bedsheets. He was very friendly and asked 
me for some samples. At that time, we had the worst production skills and no facilities. We had no clue. And when we printed his photographs of the nudes, they looked terrible. I couldn’t show them to him, otherwise our relationship would be finished already.” 
Taschen shelved the idea, but the pair stayed in touch. Years later, Taschen made an approach again, and was able to convince the photographer of a “different and new” form of supersized art publishing. But, throughout the production of the Sumo book, Newton “got really anxious”, Taschen says. “He sent me a fax and it read: ‘I’ve always enjoyed and loved my work. This is the first time I am suffering from depression and I must do something about it’,” Taschen says. 
“He was in his 80s and at the height of his career. If a book like this hadn’t been well received, he had far more at stake, and far more to lose, than me. I will be grateful for him all my life, because it was tough for him for quite some time. But he was willing to believe in me.” 
The finished product spanned 460 pages, weighed 30kg and came with its own bespoke table by the French designer Philippe Starck. Copy Number 1 was put up for auction and sold for $304,000. Sumo was then printed in a limited edition of 10,000, each of which cost €3,000. 
In the press, the book made headlines, but was also met with some derision. Corners of the publishing world saw it as a folly, a vanity project and an ostentatious marketing stunt. And yet the 
book sold out. To buy a first edition of Helmut Newton Sumo today would cost upwards of €5,000. 
Several Sumo books followed, including one dedicated to the heavyweight boxer Muhammad Ali—which came with a sculpture or print (depending on the edition) by the artist Jeff Koons—and a David Hockney one, with 1,000 editions accompanied by an iPad print and a further 9,000 of them signed by the artist. 
“Hockney is a giant. I followed his work all my life and was introduced to him in the 1990s by Billy Wilder and Helmut Newton,” Taschen says. The publisher explains that Hockney was at first reluctant to make a book of past works as he is “not a nostalgic person at all”. But once Taschen had convinced him, the artist spent “an entire year on this book and found no time to paint”. 
Sumo may have made headlines, but at the same time Taschen was pursuing what might be termed a populist approach to art publishing. With the help of large print runs and low-cost production techniques, Taschen quickly filled the shelves of high street bookshops and coffee tables of homes well away from cultural capitals. “That is important to me,” he says. “To make books accessible—geographically, price-wise—to people who have not been exposed to them before. I think books plant seeds, as they did for me.” 
A passion for Taschen | The Guardian 
(November 4, 2021) 
Taschen. It's not just porn, you know. It's not just fantastic women in fetish spikes - tied up. It is also dogs and gnomes and Gaudi; it is Swedish interiors; it is car crashes and Tiki and the complete paintings of Van Gogh. 
Sex. Art. Design. The urbane consumer now looks at a Wassily chair leg by Marcel Breuer in much the same way that he (or she) looks at a naked woman's leg by Helmut Newton. Visual and digital culture has bred the relaxed detachment of voyeurism.The Taschen catalogue reflects this. Ron Arad is as glamorous as Betty Page; a Frans Lanting parrot 'evokes luscious sensuality'; even a bat looks lewd. 
Think flash. Think weird. Think houses by Neutra and lilies by Redoute. Taschen books are beautiful, original, unpredictable and - pay attention, because this is important - affordable. They have made Taschen a unique publishing house in a world where inventive notions struggle to survive in the swamp of corporate conglomeration. The founder, Benedikt Taschen, has merged the sensibility of a small imprint with sure-fire commercial ideas, while managing to remain independent, transgressive and viable. And he doesn't print cookery books. For this alone, he should be revered. 
Taschen has offices in London, Madrid, New York, Paris and Tokyo, but Cologne is the place to view the man, inspect him, as it were, in his natural habitat. A German cathedral city on the Rhine, 
Cologne is not immediately recognisable as a place to promote fancy plans. It seems, on casual inspection, to be full of ice-cream parlours. Berlin, surely, with its psycho-sexual cabaret backdrop and tradition of cultural resistance, should be the breeding ground of the wayward. But Wolfgang Tillmans, an artist with whom Taschen has worked since 1993 and who grew up in this area, observes that Cologne is, in fact, exactly the right place for this operation. 
'Berlin is more judgmental than Cologne,' he says. 'Cologne has an art-loving liberal past and it is much easier to get things done there. It is very open-minded. In the 80s, it was the centre of the West German art-scene, and was an important link to American artists. There were other artists living there, as well as collectors - rich industrialist patrons - unlike Berlin, which is surrounded by agriculture and which, until recently, did not have strong connections to western Europe.' 
And so to Hohenzollernring 53. This is a grand, grey mansion with a cool, white courtyard. It is all pillars and white walls and glass and parquet floors that are screaming out for someone to tap dance on them. There is a suspended boat by the late Martin Kippenberger. There is a huge nude by Helmut Newton. There is also a staff of 75, as well as Mr and Mrs Taschen. 
Mr Taschen is wearing a Brazil football shirt. He has a sad face, lugubrious even, and is a quiet person who listens and asks questions rather than expostulating revelations. 'He doesn't give away a lot,' says Tillmans. 'And he doesn't talk about his emotions.' 
Nevertheless, he is patently enjoying himself. 'I always wanted to be number one in the area in which I worked,' he tells me. 'If the goal was not working, then I changed the goal.' 
Mrs Taschen is Angelika - graceful, lean, a cool blonde in red kitten heels. Born in Cologne, where her parents ran a bookstore, she originally wanted to be a ballet dancer, but grew too tall. This was heart-breaking. 'I still get emotional when I read reviews of the new ballets,' she says. 'When a dream breaks it is very difficult.' She thought of going to America to have an operation to cut out a bit from her too-long legs, but her parents wouldn't let her. So she studied art history at Heidelberg instead. 
'After my PhD, I did not know what to do, so I went to the Frankfurt Bookfair. I was always a passionate bookworm and I was excited to see a funny [Taschen] booth with squeaking marsupials and young, laughing people. I was young, too, 25, so I wrote a letter.' 
She arrived at Taschen in 1986 in order to oversee Kolner Junggesellen (Cologne bache lors) a book that was supposed to initiate a series about single people all over the world. The book failed, but Angelika did not. She fell in love with the boss. They were married in 1996, in Cologne. 
'We came from all around the world,' remembers Eric Kroll, a friend and editor. 'Taschen arrived in a horse-drawn carriage.' 
Angelika has a 21-year-old daughter, Ana, by her first marriage. Benedikt has three children by his first marriage - Marlene, 15, Benedikt, 14, and Charlotte, 12. They all have dinners together in their apartment, which is walking distance from Taschen HQ. 
Their relationship is obviously key to both the successful running of Taschen and to the quality of their lives. 'We talk about work the whole time,' Angelika remarks. 'It is our life.' 
The Taschens share basic beliefs - that the books must be well designed and reasonably priced, and that the bad sellers don't matter so much. Car Crashes & Other Sad Stories , published last year, consisted of 195 photographs of upended corpses and crumpled bonnets taken by an unknown photographer in the 50s. It was not a hit, but, says Angelika, 'it does not matter if it is an extraordinary book and we have made some nice friends as a result of working on it'. 
'We never start with a huge print run,' Benedikt adds. 'We reprint. If you don't reprint a book, it is not a success, but neither is it a big failure, so you don't have a problem.' 
This attitude is one of their great strengths and is among the reasons why the company has managed to remain gleefully adventurous. Benedikt agrees that the company is subversive, but adds that 'it is not really intentional'. 
Nor do they see themselves as educators; it is more to do with enjoying the fact that a lot of people like what they like. 'That is 
my idea of success,' says Angelika, 'when other people laugh or share the same thing as me.' 
Angelika, as chief editor, is responsible for a series of books on interiors, a line she launched in 1993 and which became the company's best sellers. 'When I started,' she says, 'there were like two interiors books, but now everybody is doing it. It is always the same.When Taschen started doing art, art books were not very exciting and they were very, very expensive. Now, 10 years later, they are popular.' 
She also worked on last year's book by Leni Riefenstahl, a woman who once made films to promote Hitler's cause. Shameless, as always, Taschen gave the 71-year-old a hard-cover with dust jacket, sold her as 'one remarkable woman' and a 'cult feminist figure' and stirred up a controversy that was more useful than any expensive advertising campaign. 
Benedikt Taschen is an unusual man. And, like many unusual people, his creative delinquency emerged early in life. Born on Vorgebirgstrasse in the south of the city, he is the son of two GPs and the youngest of five children. 'Nobody played with me,' he notes. 'Neither parents nor siblings. Though my brother-in-law Ulli did. He was an art and music fan...' 
The suicide of his brother Wolfram (at the age of 22), when Benedikt was eight, was a tragedy that shocked the family. As a teenager, he was introspective and obsessive; his thoughts fixed on comics. He liked Donald Duck and painting vampires. This is not unusual in itself - most children like comics. But Taschen had 
a cult aesthetic and business acumen. He quickly understood how to marry his personal interests with commercial endeavour. He collected and traded, and he still does. He was not destined to become a teacher like his older sister Hannelore. At the age of 12, he started a comic-book mail-order business; at 15, he opened a comic bookshop. It was all quite punky, except there wasn't punk in Cologne. 
Taschen had difficulty surviving in the esoteric comic-book market and, in 1984, branched into art, thanks to a loan provided by his family, which funded the acquisition of 40,000 books about Magritte. The Magrittes sold and Taschen published a book by Annie Leibovitz, who was becoming one of the most famous photographers in America. Then came Dali, Picasso and the big art books. 
They continued to build on their success, though there were some failures; the introduction of toys was not a success and 100,000 inflatable apes found themselves with no place to go. A record made by Benedikt, in which he sang an Edith Piaf song, might have suffered a similar fate but it was only sent out to friends. 
Benedikt likes music, in particular music that he has not heard before. Eric Kroll remembers going to Amateur Nite at the Apollo Theatre in Harlem. 'A young black kid got up and sang. Benedikt leapt on his chair and applauded wildly. The kid was good, but not that good. I think Benedikt went wild because it was a kid with guts...' 
By 1988, Taschen was publishing in 20 languages.They had found the secret of their success - go big, go colour, go cheap and go everywhere - department store or bargain basement, the Taschen crew were never constrained by snobbery, disseminating ideas and images to a broad spectrum of people at low prices. 
'We never cared about any fucking marketing department,' Benedikt proudly points out. 'Or Barnes and Noble or WH Smith, or whatever...' 
Buildings and breasts have made Benedikt Taschen rich. He does not buy cars (he drives an old Merc); he sometimes buys clothes - he wore an orange suit and handmade snakeskin shoes for his 40th birthday party this year - but mostly he buys art. His private collection, stored in a little gallery next to his Cologne house, is stacked high with models by Jeff Koons and pictures by the late Eric Stanton, an illustrator with a fixation for cruel mistresses. Here is the lust that is compulsive acquisition. He understands the need for colour and stimulation. It is no coincidence that Taschen books, as bright and shiny as boiled sweets, appeal to the side of human nature that wants everything in the shop. 
Now Benedikt has found a lot of people to play with. He and Angelika have built up a network of artists, friends and professional allies. Benedikt prefers artists to executives or politicians. 'They have no vision,' he says of the latter. 'Nobody will care about them in 50 years' time; but we will still love and enjoy Jeff Koons' pink panther.' Their parties attract everyone from Vogue editors to artists such as Mike Kelley and Helmut Newton. 
'There was a mariachi band at his 40th birthday,' says Kroll, now a San Francisco-based photographer and collector. 'Benedikt danced on the table with Angelika. We stood across the toilet bowl and chatted while peeing. It was a macho thing. Neither one of us looked down.' 
Ideas arrive from a worldwide network of trusted editors, such as Kroll. 'The first time I saw Benedikt was in my studio in Manhattan,' he says. 'He'd seen a photo of mine, in black and white, of a young woman on a swing. She had on 60s-style high-heeled pumps, black vintage bra and white cotton high-waisted panties. Years later, he told me he'd decided to do my book, Fetish Girls , based solely on that image. 
'He remembers things, stores them in his memory and retrieves them when he's ready. Two years after I told him about a man in San Pedro who only photographed women's feet, he asked me about him over lunch at Musso and Frank, in Hollywood. The world revolves around Benedikt Taschen time.' 
Kroll found Natacha Merritt on the net, and encouraged the 22-year-old to make a book of digital photographs that she took of herself and her boyfriend having sex. 
The result, Merritt's Digital Diaries , published in March last year, is what the Taschen catalogue calls a ' back-list cash-cow' - a best seller, up there with Seaside Interiors and The Garden at Eichstätt. 
Sex. Art. Design. It's not just porn you know. In the mid-90s, when there was an increased awareness of contemporary art and architecture, Taschen started to publish the best visual books on these subjects, quickly scooping up Philippe Starck and Jeff Koons and showing an uncanny instinct for understanding what the gentrified radical wanted. The same talent for sensing trends came with the new reappraisal of Californian architecture. Just as rich opinion makers were buying and conserving houses by John Lautner and Richard Neutra, Taschen published the definitive book on the latter. 
In 1998, Benedikt confirmed his faith as a devout Modernist by buying the Chemosphere, an extraordinary building, designed by Lautner in 1960, that looks like a spaceship floating over the Hollywood hills. The eight-sided 'pod' was described, at the time, as the 'most modern house in the world'. The Taschens tend to spend summers there - this year they will go there, with the children, to celebrate their book about Billy Wilder's Some Like It Hot , which is Benedikt's favourite film. 
Benedikt met the 95-year-old director after sending him a letter addressed to 'Mr Hollywood'. 'Billy Wilder said, "All right, but who would buy such a book? You will certainly make no money with it." I said, "We will surely find some people out there, from young girls to elderly gentlemen, gay, straight, and from all walks of life, whose all-time favourite cult movie is Some Like It Hot . There must be more than two billion. And if it doesn't sell, we will have great gifts to give for years to come."' 
The new catalogue includes Country Houses of Sweden , but it also includes Exquisite Mayhem: The Spectacular and Erotic World of Wrestling . This is classic Taschen. Photographs of voluptuous women grappling with each other in small apartments are accompanied by an essay by Roland Barthes, which promotes its status from what is basically kitsch pervery to a legitimate subject for the thinking sensualist. The company has long known how to transform underground ideas into a glossy package that, on the face of it, looks mainstream. 
The same kind of provocative insouciance surrounded their publication of Tom of Finland - bulging homoerotica of the kind that still provokes death-row throes of moralism in those places that only God and map- makers have heard of. 
As Tillmans points out: 'Benedikt, as a heterosexual man, is unusual in his relaxed attitude towards homosexual erotica.' 
In fact, he is relaxed about sex in general. Richard Kern, the New York-based underground film-maker and photographer, remembers selecting pictures for his book, Model Release . 'Benedikt encouraged me to include lots of sexy pictures. I tried to explain to him that I wanted the book to be an art book that dealt with elements of sex in a conceptual rather than an erotic manner. He said to me, "Richard, you must remember that this book is not a masterpiece - it's a masturbation piece."' 
Tillmans also observes that Benedikt is child-like, in that 'he is easily bored and he will dream up stuff without thinking too much 
about the weight of the consequences'. Angelika may attempt to rein him in, but 'she doesn't necessarily always win the argument'. 
Angelika's office is smaller than that of her husband, and at the back. She prefers this. It is quiet with a nice view over the courtyard. Benedikt's office is bigger and noisier, looking out over a honking street full of cafés selling quark ballchen and kirsch-kuchen . When he sits at his big glass desk his view is taken up entirely by Llona with Ass Up - a vast picture showing a naked Jeff Koons lying underneath his Italian (now ex-) wife Cicciolina, who is wearing stockings and a floral head-dress. The artist smiles with the smug satisfaction of your normal bloke who has netted a blonde porn star. She is on top. Make of that what you will but, put it this way, these two are right in front of Benedikt every single day of his working life. Herr indoors. Herr on top? 
Angelika shrugs. She has appeared naked in their publicity pictures with much dignity and no apology. She doesn't think too much about the contraflow of complicated post- fem contradictions. She just knows that women are 'more beautiful, more intelligent and stronger'. 
Later, when she is out of the room, I ask Benedikt if he agrees, and he says yes. 
Benedikt Taschen -- how to sell books in L.A. | 
Los Angeles Times (December 11, 2013) 
It’s not just a brand name on a big fancy book. “Taschen” is a man, Benedikt Taschen, who started his publishing empire with a comic-book shop leveraged with a stock of remaindered art books. The firm is headquartered in Germany, but when he’s in Los Angeles, his landing pad is the Chemosphere, the John Lautner flying-saucer-on-a-hillside. Taschen just released a three-volume collaboration with National Geographic (“Around the World in 125 Years”), and it’s clear from the myriad images at his desk that Taschen cast his eye, and his approval, over what’s in those books and so many others. 
Interviewer: You have a dozen stores and L.A. has two of them, in Beverly Hills and the Farmers Market on Fairfax. Does that say something about L.A. as a book city? 
Taschen: It was by coincidence. One-city-one-store is usually fine, but this great location in Farmers Market was offered to us. I always liked this market. First of all, I hate shopping malls; something like the Beverly Center — not 10 horses would get me in there. But [the Farmers Market] is a great destination, this mom-and-pop store segment. 
Interviewer: But bookstores are closing hither and yon. What are you doing right? 
Taschen: That’s what we ask ourselves every day! It’s a very anachronistic business we are in. I was always disappointed how 
existing bookstores and other retailers were carrying our product — they always picked this and that one, and I always regarded them as a family of books. Unless people see our books together, they would not goin to come out with “Julius Shulman: Modernism Rediscovered,” or the circus book we did, or many others. But once you see them together, it opens up your mind and you think, wow. 
There was a [Paris] bookstore that always made picky choices of what they would take and what they wouldn’t. [It] went out of business. We did a store [nearby] and it was super-well appreciated from the first day on. 
Interviewer: Some publishers have bestselling authors whose work subsidizes unknowns. Is that your model: big books making little ones possible? 
Taschen: No, we wouldn’t operate that way. It’s reported like that, but of course publishers only [print books] because they think they might be bestsellers as well. You never know what is your bestseller until you have a bestseller. 
We know that with a number of titles, there are limitations; that this one will not make any money or even that we lose money, because it’s just part of the idea of a family of books. Not everyone is equally strong; it is your duty to support them. 
Interviewer: Is your list determined by your personal taste? 
Taschen: I would put it this way: The core program has a lot to do with my taste, but of course there are a number of titles which are less close to my heart than others. 
Interviewer: Do people come to you and say, “I have a great idea for a Taschen book”? 
Taschen: A few years ago, I counted one month — we got nearly 3,000. We answer everyone, but it’s very rare we pick one of the projects. So we send a nice thank-you letter. Sometimes they are really interesting ideas, but as you know, the execution of an idea is completely different — especially with the books we are doing, much more complex than just writing one text about one subject. An idea is great, but maybe you have to work a year, two or three years. It’s exactly like the work on a big documentary. Whatever the subject, you have to work with maybe 100 or more sources to find out what they have to contribute. 
Interviewer: You’ve pledged to make Taschen Books carbon-neutral. 
Taschen: I supported this forestation program for maybe five years already, but last year we made a survey of the carbon numbers you have to offset. You talk to all your suppliers, you know exactly how they operate. All of your suppliers, the printing companies, the transportation — then [calculate] the energy you have to carbon-offset. It’s a very complex and interesting subject. 
Interviewer: Resale prices for some Taschen titles have gone up tremendously. Do you regard them as investments? 
Taschen: Surely not as investments. The vast majority of our books inspire people when they buy them or get them as a gift. A great side effect is most likely they will at least hold their value or maybe gain value. If people just buy something growing in value, I would not advise them to buy our books — do something else. But if on top you have this [increase], then, great! 
Our collectors’ books — the signed and limited editions — the majority of buyers are male. That’s what we know from our client profiles. We hear quite often that they have this hobby, to collect these books. Often the family says, “Why do you buy all these expensive books?” It’s very helpful if they can say their hobby is endorsed by this [increase]! 
Interviewer: Is there a sweet-spot price point? 
Taschen: It just depends on the buyers. We take great pride that we have books that cost $10 or $15; then, of course, we have $50 or $100 or $1,000 or more, but we always take the same care because that’s what we think we owe our customers. If you’re a student, maybe the sweet spot is $20, and if you are a Hollywood mogul, then the sweet spot is probably ... $25! [Laughs.] 
Interviewer: You started out trading in comic books. Is Taschen still into comics? 
Taschen: Not for a long time, but we have started slowly to make a comic-book program, and we will do some very big productions in a couple of years. 
Interviewer: What’s behind the partnership with National Geographic? 
Taschen: It was a kind of unconventional marriage. It is the first time ever they gave someone unrestricted access to the archives in Washington. There are so many photographs that have never been published, or when they were published, people didn’t realize what great photos they were. Nat Geo had restrictions on the [photo] size; the size never changed from the very beginning, this relatively small size. A story published in 1950 would not necessarily choose the pictures we would choose today. 
Interviewer: Nat Geo showed us the exotic; nowadays, people visit those places and everyone’s got a camera. Does that change our relationship with these images? 
Taschen: For sure toward photography in general, but people necessarily think, “I can do that.” That would be too naive. 
Interviewer: What difference has digital photography made to your work? 
Taschen: Much easier, absolutely. We could not produce what we do now without digital technology. We don’t alter the images, but it makes the handling much easier. 
Interviewer: You’ve made books about nudity, and some specifically about breasts and penises. Some people wanted you to airbrush the nipples from the cover of the Helmut Newton book. 
Taschen: At the time here in America, a [fear] of nipples was second after a terrorist attack. I did not take this too seriously. If someone doesn’t like it, nobody’s forced to buy our books. But others would not like it if we airbrushed the nipples! We’ve tried to make it [so] people don’t have to be shy. 
Interviewer: Taschen is known more for pictures than text. Are narrative books going away? 
Taschen: [Our books] are visually driven. Our National Geographic project, if you don’t have great captions which tell you in a short version the entire story of that picture, you would get lost right away. I always saw it as equally important as the picture itself. 
Interviewer: So a picture isn’t just worth a thousand words — it may need a thousand words. 
Taschen: I completely agree. The National Geographic [project], the percentage is probably 20% [text] to 80% [photographs], but without that 20%, you would not understand anything. 
Interviewer: Does it bother you when people refer to yours as coffee-table books? 
Taschen: If I would be a book and had the choice — you would see my spine or see me full frontal in the middle of the house on the coffee table, of course I would choose to be a coffee-table book. When I go to the house of a stranger, the first thing I do, I check 
what books they have. You can learn tremendously when you see what people have on their shelves. 
Interviewer: Are there projects you want to do that you haven’t? 
Taschen: One is World War II. I’m thinking for maybe 10 years, how do you do this? 
Interviewer: Do you use a Kindle? 
Taschen: No. A book has no real need for electricity. I buy a lot of old books that you won’t get on a Kindle anyhow. You get a lot, but a majority that I wouldn’t read anyway. 
Interviewer: Do you dog-ear pages? 
Taschen: I do it with novels and biographies. I usually don’t do it with art books. Look, here’s a biography of this famous German literary critic. Usually I have no pen available. But at least I can [do] that! 
Benedikt Taschen's Risky Business | The 
Washington Post (February 4, 2011) 
Benedikt Taschen likes to do things his way, and he has built a publishing empire strictly on that edict alone. Despite having seven offices, 11 stores and 200 employees world-wide, everything still must be run by him before it goes on the shelf, and you never know what he will come up with next. One thing is for certain: He will stand behind every book that he publishes, no matter what—a directional choice that has not only defined the Cologne-born publisher as a seminal maverick in the world of books, but also as a rebellious risk-taker. 
We meet at Mr. Taschen's residential compound high above Hollywood, which is really two houses: a John Lautner-designed spaceship, and the home down below he shares with his wife and new baby (he has three adult children from a previous marriage). While he gives me a quick tour, Souci, his French bulldog, follows him around like the puppy she actually isn't (she's hovering around the 14-year mark). "We need to stay close to her," he says as we wander through the garden. "Souci is not moving so fast these days and the coyotes—they travel in packs up here." 
Just like the scavengers in these Hollywood hills, Mr. Taschen is well aware of those circling and waiting for the right moment to pounce. Not many publishers can be heralded and begrudged at the same time as vigorously as he has over the past 30 years. He doesn't adhere to rules; he makes his own. Mr. Taschen, who turns 50 this month, has cornered the book market in a way that most sellers only dream of: Cult status, with massive sales. "He 
has built his empire solely on personal vision and taste; this is niche publishing to the extreme," says Matt Tyrnauer, a writer for Vanity Fair and the filmmaker behind "Valentino: The Last Emperor" (2008) whose interviews were included in a book on the fashion designer published by Taschen. "Benedikt makes these remarkable documents with incredible attention to quality; he is only interested in getting the most complete and extremely interesting subjects, if only for their eccentricity." 
Mr. Taschen started out selling comic books when he was in his teens, with his first store called Taschen Comics. Then there was a chance encounter in 1984 with 40,000 remainder copies of a book on Magritte; he bought them for a pittance, sold them for double and began his career publishing his own books with the money made. Today, the company publishes about 100 titles per year. 
Mr. Taschen admits he puts too much love and attention into his creations to ever go into the orbit of mass publishing, adding that he wants to make collectibles, not disposables. "Most books look so s— and dispassionately done; they are disposable from the beginning," says the publisher. "Their books are not designed to become significant objects, so most books have no identity, no soul. I'm not saying all, but the vast majority [of publishing houses], with a few exceptions, have lost their profile and personality. It doesn't look like they have spent a lot of care and love." 
His most recognizable book changed his empire forever. "SUMO" (1999) by Helmut Newton was an oversized heavyweight, at 35.4 
kilograms with 420 images. The book sold out in its limited run of 10,000 copies and became the most expensive book of the 20th century. Initially, it retailed at $1,500 (€1,091); today, it sells for $15,000. The first "SUMO" copy sold at auction in Berlin in 2000 for $430,000. 
The book's success made Mr. Taschen the pivotal new force in collectible books, and gave artists an ally. "Benedikt Taschen is a miracle of taste in publishing," muses Matt Weiner, the creator of the television show "Mad Men." (The two are collaborating on a book of interviews and never-before-seen images of Mr. Weiner's landmark show to be released this fall). "He consistently maintains incredible quality in content and style....He documents both the present and the past in an indispensable way." Mr. Taschen says he was thrilled when it was decided the two would collaborate. "Matt had this vision for his show and nobody wanted it for years, and now look. That's what I admire and, in this way, he and I are totally compatible. Few people are that persistent. I love to showcase the artists like him." 
But Mr. Taschen's books aren't all about art. His world is filled with many other subjects such as film, fashion and architecture. Sex is also one of Taschen's favorite subjects and, more often than not, what the publisher is chastised for. Books like "The Big Penis Book" (2008), which will soon be re-released in 3D, and Japanese photographer Nobuyoshi Araki's 1,000-image, bondage-and-floral epic, titled "Araki" (2002) (there's another one coming this spring) raised the ire of some in the industry. "In the media, sex is still, in a way, officially the devil. I never saw it like this; it's one of the driving forces in human nature. Surprisingly, sex is a very 
insignificant part of business—only about 5% of our sales, even though the media makes it seem like more," he says. 
For Mr. Taschen, no risk means no excitement and no audience. He knows not every book is going to garner great sales. "We have a different way to approach things; usually we don't care about budgets. I never compromise quality, and I'm willing to take a risk. We want to have our books done right and then we look at how to finance it," he explains. It is this ideal that makes Mr. Taschen stand out. "Whether it's someone like Julius Shulman, whose career Taschen really revived in the '90s or Elmer Batters, who was the ultimate leg-fetish photographer, Benedikt is interested in getting the most complete and definitive book on the material," Mr. Tyrnauer says. 
For Mr. Taschen, it's personal, and always will be. "Many times I have been asked why did we do this [this way]," he muses. "But at the same time, why shouldn't we?" 
Taschen, Rhymes With Passion | Vanity Fair (October 2011) 
Benedikt Taschen, the renowned publisher of exquisitely illustrated art books and equally exquisite sex books, took me out for lunch at Son of a Gun, on Third Street, West Hollywood, and we had the place to ourselves. 
The restaurant is run by two young friends of his, Jon Shook and Vinny Dotolo—L.A.’S MASTERMINDS OF “DUDE FOOD,” declares The Wall Street Journal—and it had yet to open to the public for lunch. But Mr. Taschen has star status, and, besides, he’s an investor. “It permits me to enter through the back door,” he told me in his light German accent, as I followed this unusual man through the kitchen and he introduced me to everyone. 
Born in Cologne in 196l, he’s the youngest son of two doctors and was once described affectionately by Helmut Newton as “a madman.” Taschen is the renegade in the traditionally stuffy world of classy illustrated books. In the early days of his spectacularly successful career, an amusing photograph was published of him sitting happily next to his naked second wife (who looks delighted). 
“It’s an unusual thing for a book publisher to do,” I said. “It’s an unusual thing for a second wife to do!” he replied 
Taschen Books (“Est. 1980. For optimists only”) mirrors his limitless, sometimes eccentric enthusiasms—from the elaborate reproduction of the 1534 Luther Bible to The Stanley Kubrick Archives, to The Big Butt Book, which he published as though it were a scholarly monograph on Cézanne’s apples. 
“But there’s a big misconception about the erotic books,” he said. “They account for only 5 percent of our sales, unfortunately.” 
‘O.K. Cool,” said dude chef Shook, offering us a simple, delicious lunch of couscous that he explained wasn’t actually couscous but cauliflower, served with local bass, fennel, raisins, Meyer-lemon vinaigrette, and a black-olive tapenade. Mr. Taschen used to enjoy a drink. “But I only have to see a bottle of beer now and I fall asleep instantly. I don’t even have to drink it.” 
He lives with his third wife in Los Angeles and Cologne (still the site of his headquarters). There are three adult children from his first marriage, and a 20-month-old son from his third. Hence, he explained, the company’s new list of children’s books. “I need to read to him!” 
We talked about his own precocious childhood. Though one of five siblings, he was a loner as a boy who preferred the company of adults. He liked to paint, vampires mostly. At 12 he was running a mail-order business from home, dealing in his own collection of comics. In his teens, he was one of the proud performers in a professional vaudeville act impersonating the legends of soul, the Ink Spots. At 18 he opened his first store in Cologne, selling comics. “I always made about 10,000 marks a month,” he told me, 
as if it came naturally. (That’s about $5,500 a month for the teenage Taschen.) 
A trauma in his early childhood—“the only cloud in my pretty cloudless life”—was the devastation of his 20-year-old brother’s suicide. He was seven. “I’ve tried to solve the puzzle,” he lamented. 
He saw no point in going to university. He’s a self-educated man with the Midas touch. “You’re a very independent publisher,” I remarked. 
“It’s what I need to be. Money made me independent. But I wasn’t much different when I had no money. I’ve never been interested in focus groups or marketing strategies. You try to publish what you really like.” 
“But is that always what the public likes?” 
“A huge disappointment was a wonderfully written and designed book on Diego Rivera. But the people’s artist wasn’t bought by the people.” 
He’s philosophical about setbacks, however. “If you want success, you need failure.” (Though not too much failure.) An early, nutty project involved 100,000 unsold inflatable apes. His lesson? “Don’t inflate your business on inflatables.” 
Mr. Taschen, it seems, possesses a romantic soul. In 1981 he made a vinyl 45 record of himself singing two ardent love songs that he sent to all his friends. The A side is his French version of Piaf’s “À Quoi Ça Sert l’Amour?” (What Good Is Love?), and the B side is his Spanish rendition of “Amor de Mis Amores” (Love of My Loves). I’ve heard them and can confidently attest that he’s game for anything. 
He is the publisher who turned books into objects of desire. Sumo, the 464-page, 66-pound collection of Helmut Newton photographs he published in 1999, weighed so much it was sold with its own table (designed by Philippe Starck). “The idea from the beginning was to turn the book into an object that you can display,” he explained. 
“A very expensive object.” 
“Until then we were known for inexpensive books. But Sumo was a landmark for us because it sold for $1,500.” 
The limited edition of Sumo sold out. Today, it sells for $15,000—an increase of 1,000 percent. Other Taschen blockbusters have appreciated dramatically in value, too. “So the art book has become an investment,” I suggested, “in place of art.” 
“But it can never be art,” he replied firmly. “It’s an artifact—a collaboration with artists, the best we can do.” 
And after a while I asked the engaging Benedikt Taschen, “What is your earliest memory?” 
“I was three or four, and I was in Holland, where my family went for the summer,” he began, “and I remember spending most of my time underneath the planks of the iceman’s cart. I was waiting for change to fall through to the sand. Best days, I got two guilders, about a dollar or so, and no sunburn. Good things come from above.” 
Perhaps they do. That day, from his home off Mulholland Drive, a stately funicular transported us to the John Lautner architectural masterpiece he also owns—a 1960 octagonal gem with dizzying views of the San Fernando Valley below. Known as the Chemosphere, it’s built on a 30-foot concrete stem. “I bought it the day after I first saw it,” he told me with typical enthusiasm. It resembles a flying saucer hovering over earthly delights. 
