[00:00:17.660] - Speaker 3
When I was 12 years old, my mom was an antique dealer, and there was always boxes of totty junk around the house.

[00:00:35.020] - Speaker 1
And in one of the boxes is a little paperback book called Led Zeppelin by Howard Milet. And I actually have a copy of it here.

[00:00:42.980] - Speaker 2
Oh, fantastic. I'd like to see it.

[00:00:44.410] - Speaker 1
And it was in the bottom of the book, and I didn't know who they were. I found the story really inspiring because it's four very different guys that as little boys have this idea of doing music, and they to pursue this dream, each in their different ways, two of them becoming session musicians and working within right in the belly of the beast. And the other two as West Midlanders who are ostracized by the London music scene.

[00:01:21.040] - Speaker 2
So you read the book, you were not a Led Zeppelin fan when you read the book?

[00:01:24.300] - Speaker 1
I didn't know who they were. Never heard a note of their music.

[00:01:27.160] - Speaker 2
So the book really was your introduction. Yeah.

[00:01:29.520] - Speaker 1
I found I found out years later when this film came out and I was meeting aficionados, they said this guy was on the few people the group were close and friendly with. Interesting. And he actually had lots of access to them. They didn't collaborate on the book, but he was around. And there was a tiny number of people that were allowed into the Zeppelin in a circle, and he was one of them. And so there was a real sense of who these people were. And then I I just currently got into the group's music and started thinking, well, let's listen to this music.

[00:02:04.180] - Speaker 2
Do you remember what was the first thing you heard of theirs?

[00:02:07.340] - Speaker 1
Led Zeppelin 4 was the first thing. And then I went back to three, then to two, then to one. And then I went forward the other way to House of the Holy. But Zeppelin 4 was the first thing I heard, and I played it. And I remember being completely jaw dropped. At the end of When the Levy Breaks. And I went, Who put this onto this piece of plastic? How has this even done? It seems so beyond what I would hear four people doing in a room. I remember looking at the label that said, Produced by Jimmy Page. I went, Oh, I guess that's the alchemist that made this.

[00:02:46.860] - Speaker 2
What was your musical taste like before that?

[00:02:49.960] - Speaker 1
My friend's older brother was into the clash, so I used to play that first clash album obsessively.

[00:02:56.600] - Speaker 2
So it's punk rock is happening when you were growing up?

[00:02:59.560] - Speaker 1
Yes. Yes.

[00:03:00.460] - Speaker 2
So by the time that you got interested in them, they were already gone. It was from the past.

[00:03:06.510] - Speaker 1
Yes. But there was a connection. My mom saw me reading this book for the second time. She said, Do you remember this gentleman used to come round to the house and he would talk to you and you'd sit on his knee? And he was always trying to buy antiques from me and our fireplace, specifically. And I said, Yeah, I remember I remember this guy. He said, That's the manager of that group, Peter Grant. He used to come to our house.

[00:03:34.980] - Speaker 2
What were your memories of Peter Grant from childhood?

[00:03:37.500] - Speaker 1
Huge guy, very imposing, had a Fu Manchu beard, and very friendly to me as a kid. Would you say he was imposing just by his physicality or by his demeanor? But the interesting thing is he resembled a lot of antique dealers that would buy from my mom. A lot of them looked like him. So he was not Very typical, even though he's very striking, he's in his pictures. I'd seen other guys with that appearance. So he used to come in and my mom had been recommended to him. My mom was like an entry level antique dealer. So she would buy things and have a stall in Camden Passage. So he'd heard from another dealer down the road that you could get really good deals from my mom before the stuff went into Regents Street in these expensive stores. So he'd show up. My dad came home from teaching at Imperial College one day and saw Peter leaving the house, and he parked his car out of view around the corner. It was a Silver Shadow Rolls-Royce. So my mom then found out what it was he did. And he met and confessed he was the manager of Led Zeppelin.

[00:04:44.520] - Speaker 1
But I remember him always trying to buy the fireplace in our living room, and he said he wanted it for his daughter's bedroom. It was a rather than lovely Art Nouveau fireplace, and my mom refused to sell it to him. So when I took my mom for afternoon tea last month, I was asking, I said, Do you remember all this stuff about Peter Grant correctly? And she said, yes. He said, Yes. And I said, And I'm the only person that ever said no to Peter Grant. Fantastic.

[00:05:11.660] - Speaker 2
So you read the book, and then what happens next in your personal Led Zeppelin experience. You listen to four, you go back to one, and then you get through the catalog. And are you, would you say, lifelong fan from there on? Yeah.

[00:05:26.660] - Speaker 1
I completely fell in love with it. And I think one of the things that enhanced my love for it was knowing about who they were and how they put it together.

[00:05:37.100] - Speaker 2
So the book really informed you?

[00:05:39.620] - Speaker 1
The book was hugely influential on my life. It's probably one of the two most influential books on how I do things as a Filmmaker. Because the book was about when you're a child, you have this light within you. We all have it. And it's like this flame that burns inside you. And you hopefully find a direct action for that passion. And in my case, it was film. In their case, it was music. And it strikes me as you go through life, you have to protect that flame against people that will try and snuff it out. And then as you go into the commercial world, we have to find ways to protect it against the business forces that come in. So they have Peter Grant that shields them in this Bell jar. And so I only realized, and I was thinking about this at the end of becoming Led Zeppelin, I asked Jimmy, please give a message to your 13-year-old self and other 13-year-olds out there. What can we learn from this journey? And he paused a minute. He looks at me and looks straight out and he says, If you have something different, Inside of yourself, you have to work and work and work.

[00:06:49.000] - Speaker 1
But if your aim is true, you can achieve your dreams. I believe this can be done because this is what happens. He's talking about the inner light inside of himself. And so I think And I think what impressed me about this was these guys, they were fueling that. And it was these people that they don't waste a minute. Each member of Led Zeppelin, they are never sitting on the sofa or doing the equipment and looking at their telephone They are constantly out there interacting with people. I found that very inspiring. So with Jimmy and John Paul Jones, they're doing all these studio sessions. And every single job that comes up, they'll take it. So When Mickey Mouse says to John Paul Jones, do you do arrangements? He goes, Yeah, all the time like this. And he figures that out to do it on the hoof. Or Jimmy goes into the studio and he's wandering into the control room and trying to figure out how they're getting reverb, how they're making this effect. So they're learning everything. And the same with John Bonham and Robert, even though the London music scene is shutting them out, they're literally in countless groups.

[00:07:54.560] - Speaker 1
I mean, it took me almost a year making the film to even figure out tracking all All the things they did. It's so complex, all the different groups they are in. And the main thing is they're using every second. They're not wasting a moment. And then when that first meeting happens, this is so true of life. And they're in that rehearsal space in Girard Street, and they start playing Train, Kept, a Roll, and they know what it is they've got. All that time, all that interaction with countless people, all those experiences they've thrown themselves gotten to, they recognize what that moment is.

[00:08:33.160] - Speaker 2
And the only way they could really know how special it was was because of all the work they had done leading up to it. Correct. This was different than all of the other things they had been doing. Yeah. And they had been doing some really good things.

[00:08:44.700] - Speaker 1
So when I was a kid, I was lucky. I got thrown into cinema. My dad banned television, so I wasn't able to watch TV as a small child, which is probably one of the best things he ever did. He just wanted us to become academics, his kids.

[00:09:00.790] - Speaker 2
What was your father?

[00:09:02.100] - Speaker 1
He taught at Imperial College, Hydrodynamics. So he was like an engineer and a scientist, very intellectual guy, an inspiring man. But I wanted to move work in the arts from a very small age. And so my next door neighbor, as a birthday present for mowing her lawn. When I was about seven, she bought me tickets to my first cinema show, which when I got to cinema, I realized it was Harold Lloyd, silent, comedy, Safety Last, with an old lady accompanying it on piano. Well, to a seven-year-old, if you've never seen a movie before, this is mind-blowing with him hanging off the clock tower. That's amazing. And so that stayed with me. And then a month later or two, my mom took me to my next cinema show, which was a giant Odeon in Stretton, which just held 2,700 people. It was totally packed. It was a rerun of Gone with the Wind. Wow. Those are my first two films that I saw in a cinema. And so my mind was blown. And then I got a VHS about the making of Gone with the Wind, narrated by Clister Plumber. And I must have watched that about 150 times.

[00:10:09.140] - Speaker 1
It was all about how the film was made. It was so complex and what a nail bite. And then my next film, she had David Niven's book, The Moon is the Balloon, which are all these vignettes about Hollywood. Each one a chapter on a legendary Hollywood character he was meeting with. And I went, I want to work in that world. It was absolutely fascinating. So that was my background. And this is somehow related to Zeppelin. It was that thing of experience.

[00:10:35.580] - Speaker 2
At some point, did you decide, I want to make a Led Zeppelin movie? When did that happen?

[00:10:39.160] - Speaker 1
Okay, so we made a series of four films called American Epic that we did with Robert Redford narrating and producing. And that's the history of American music? It was on the first electrical sound recordings of the first Blues, country, gospel. So it's essentially where all contemporary music today comes from.

[00:11:00.000] - Speaker 2
Where did the idea for that one come from?

[00:11:02.440] - Speaker 1
I had become very interested in those early '20s recordings. So the background to this is the film codifies this period that really hasn't been understood. Essentially in 1926, the majority of music sold in America was in the big cities like Chicago, New York, Boston. And it was light classical show tunes, big band jazz, this thing. Radio exploded in '25, '26. And within a couple of a year or so, record sales in America dropped by 80 %.

[00:11:42.320] - Speaker 2
I didn't know this.

[00:11:44.500] - Speaker 1
Most people don't. And so familiar to people that lived at the end of the 20th century with Napster. So all these people in the city were like, we'll just play radio now. So the record companies went into a panic and they thought, we're going to be out of business. They came up with the idea, why don't we record poor people in rural America? So they realized quickly that the rural American people would not buy what they were selling in the cities. But they were confident there was a market there because most of the rural communities didn't have electricity in their homes. They thought, Well, we don't have to worry about radio, and we can sell them these little wind up record players. So they organized talent contests across the whole of the South, saying, Columbia Records will be in Johnson City on February the first, 1927. If you want to be immortalized, the phonograph record be here. And literally thousands of people traveled hundreds of miles. And it coincided with the invention of the first electrical recording equipment. So the first microphone, the first amplifier, which they all packed into these enormous trucks, and they traveled with like, trucks filled with wet cell batteries that would power all this stuff.

[00:12:58.040] - Speaker 1
And then a fully driven lathe, because Because this is pre-tape.

[00:13:02.060] - Speaker 2
They went straight to this.

[00:13:03.340] - Speaker 1
Straight to disk, cutting to a wax disk. The wax disk from these recordings were then shipped in ice back to the pressing plants in New Jersey, where they would then be plated and the '78s would be recorded. This was like this golden time that people like Frank Zapper talk about, where the people running the industry don't understand what the music is. And this is when the most creative things happen. Off in the case, actually. Yes. And you would be certainly an individual would have ridden the crest of a whole wave of music that people in the industry, when you were starting Defchan, would be going, what the hell is this? But you had some instinct for it and some connection with these artists. There was this golden point when you were breaking through this stuff where the suits did not understand what this was.

[00:13:51.880] - Speaker 2
Not only did they not like it, they thought it wasn't music.

[00:13:55.180] - Speaker 1
That's how fine it was. This is the best time, artistically, isn't it? This is the greatest time. And all they know is Rick's bringing in this non-music rubbish.

[00:14:07.150] - Speaker 2
That people seem to like.

[00:14:08.250] - Speaker 1
But they're buying it. So Karen pressing it for him and make money off it. The moment they think they understand it and they have ideas, it's over.

[00:14:17.570] - Speaker 2
They ruin it.

[00:14:18.720] - Speaker 1
They ruin it, yeah. So in this case, the record companies, they're coming in and there's this Cajun music from Louisiana, the Brofres. And they're like, What the hell is this? But it's selling. Lydia Mendoza with the Teano music. Don't know what it is, but it's selling. And the Blues music from Mississippi in the country. These records started selling hundreds of thousands of copies. And what was a total surprise to the record companies was that the Memphis Jugg Band, that would be the first... I mean, that would be the prototype of hip hop. I had Nas in American Epic doing one of their tracks, and it literally is a hip hop song on the road again. And And he says that. He says, God, I didn't realize this went back to 1927. Yeah.

[00:15:04.640] - Speaker 2
And the Grateful Dead based their whole trip on jug bands as well. That's where they grew out of jug bands. Correct.

[00:15:10.460] - Speaker 1
Yeah. So these records started being ordered. The big surprise was the records being recorded in Memphis were being ordered in Illinois, in Massachusetts, in New York State.

[00:15:22.460] - Speaker 2
And they weren't expecting that. They thought it would be local for the community, but the records traveled.

[00:15:26.730] - Speaker 1
Yeah. And so I it as the first time America heard itself.

[00:15:33.100] - Speaker 2
Yes. It's beautiful.

[00:15:34.600] - Speaker 1
I took it to Robert Redford, and he said, This is America's greatest untold story, and I'll help you get this made. Fantastic. So it was three films traveling through, filming in 38 states, and telling the untold stories of nine key musicians, all from totally different backgrounds.

[00:15:53.840] - Speaker 2
Name one of your favorite tracks from the first.

[00:15:57.020] - Speaker 1
Oh, from the first episode? Probably The On the Road Again by the Memphis Judd Band. That's us.

[00:16:30.000] - Speaker 3
Wouldn't that black woman tell you the reason why? Why? Black woman's evil do things on the fly. No. You look for yourself to be good and hot. She never put her backbone in the fight. She's on the road again. Just to show you what I'm doing. But on the road, I went to my window, my window was propped. I went to my door, my door was locked. I stepped right back, I shake my head. A big black nigger in my fold in bed. I shot through the window, I broke the glass. I never seen a little nigger run so fast. He's on the road again. Lord, a nasty barneesman on the road. He's on the road again. Lord, a nasty barneesman on the road.

[00:17:41.380] - Speaker 2
That's from what year?

[00:17:43.060] - Speaker 1
1927. Wow.

[00:17:45.340] - Speaker 2
Amazing. And you tell the story of them.

[00:17:50.360] - Speaker 1
Yeah. It's the first time their story has ever been told on film. Beautiful. So I have footage of them that hadn't been seen before. Images. They've never been... Before we made the film, this is one of the most influential African-American groups of all time. You could make a case of the very first American pop group. Really unbelievably powerful music. Amazing story.

[00:18:11.930] - Speaker 2
Tell me about looking for the archival material. It sounds like this is all lost material.

[00:18:18.100] - Speaker 1
Yeah, it was all lost. There's nothing in the Smithsonian or the Library of Congress.

[00:18:23.590] - Speaker 2
How do you start out? First of all, how do you know what to look for? And then when you know what to look for, how do you find it?

[00:18:29.830] - Speaker 1
So first off in the period, I realized this was the well string where everything came from, these recordings. The ones I was familiar with, I went, without this, none of these acts that we know today would exist. It's all codified then. I was like, well, how do I tell these stories? So the first thing I did was I got about 100 acts whose records were so impactful to me that I thought, I'm going to research all 100 of these people and then pick out what are the greatest stories. And so the 100 acts, you can find that we did with Sony a box set called the American Epic Collection. And it's 100 songs on a five CD set of what I consider to be the greatest recordings were made in those extraordinary recording sessions that Columbia and Victor and Paramount did.

[00:19:27.140] - Speaker 2
And were most of those things out of print?

[00:19:29.520] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Oh, yeah. Long out of print. Long out of print, yeah. So I'll give an example of one of the stories in the film. To discover what the greatest records are, I went to a group of 78 collectors, and I'd be traveling to their houses across America, Richard Nevins, he's out in New Jersey. It was John Teff Teller, the legendary Blues collector in Oregon. And then Michael Kieffer, one of the greats across the board, all genres from that era collector based in Los Angeles. And I I would spend days in their house pulling 78s off the shelves.

[00:20:04.560] - Speaker 2
Would they turn you on to things?

[00:20:06.020] - Speaker 1
Yeah. And they would go, You got to hear this. So you got to hear this. And so there was a whole bunch of things that have never been reissued on CD in any form. And I was just collecting the ones that just blew my mind. I was looking for things that I thought anyone today that heard this, this piece of music, it stopped them in their tracks and go, What the hell is that? Who are they? So I'm looking at these 100 acts, and say, One of the ones was in the gospel area was this 1927 recording called My Heart Keeps Singing by elder virgin congregation. And it has this wonderful, incredibly familiar sound to me That when I played the Taj Mahal, he goes, No, that's West Indian. That's the whole West Indian thing going on there. It was just credited to elder Birch and congregation, My Heart Keeps Singing. I just love this track. No one knew anything about who this person was. And this track had been reissued on a number of CD compilations and was highly regarded. So Victor, that put it out, is owned by Sony BMG. So I went to the Sony BMG archives with the help of Adam Block at Legacy, who let me just wander around.

[00:21:19.840] - Speaker 1
They had all the recording sheets that the engineers would type up at these remote sessions they were doing, field sessions. It had the elder a sheet from 1927. It said, elderbirch, Chirore, South Carolina. So I got on a plane to Chirore, South Carolina.

[00:21:39.600] - Speaker 2
So this is the first bit of information-That's all I've got. You've got the name of a city.

[00:21:45.400] - Speaker 1
And I have no idea if this is his town.

[00:21:47.620] - Speaker 2
And it's 100 years ago that you're looking for information in this little town from 100 years ago. Yes.

[00:21:54.820] - Speaker 1
So I go to this little town, and the first place you go is the library. And they'll always be fascinated with an English person turning up, wanting to know about some record made almost 100 years ago. It really gets librarians going. That's why libraries are so important. Other than these internet things, they're much more important because there are people that care about this stuff. So I arrive and they're completely baffled. They never heard this elder birch. And then I meet all the various white dignitaries in the town, fascinating, but don't know who it is. I eventually get sent over the tracks to the African-American part of the town. And I I'm introduced to this elderly gentleman, Ted Bradley, who's in his 80s. His eyes start welling up, and he goes, elder Birch, my God, I haven't heard that name in years. He goes, Yeah, he had a big story. He used to buy popsicles from him. And he describes the church he had. He built the church, this Triumph sanctified church with his bare hands. And he said, And we would all sit outside the church and listen to the music. And he said, The white people used to all drive up in their cars, this is in the '20s, and sit outside the church and listen to this extraordinary music.

[00:23:05.400] - Speaker 1
And he said, Birch was the founder, one of the founders of the NAACP in South Carolina. Big force in this. And he goes, But you know who elder Birch really influenced? And I said, No. And he goes, The kid that lived two doors up from his church and would hear that music from his bedroom all Sunday long. I said, Who is that? He goes, Dizzy Gillespie. Wow.

[00:23:27.440] - Speaker 2
That's amazing. Let's listen to that track. Yeah.

[00:23:33.620] - Speaker 1
Every since my since. Every since my since.

[00:23:38.340] - Speaker 3
He's taken away. He's taken away. My heart keeps He's still singing, singing, singing all the time.

[00:23:50.080] - Speaker 1
Yes, Jesus was.

[00:23:52.120] - Speaker 3
Yes, Jesus was. He in his love. He in his love. He keep singing, singing, singing all the time. He taught me how. He taught me how. You ever watch and free. To ever watch and free. And now, I Every choice and every day. Says Jesus, why. Says Jesus, why. Me in his love. Me in his love. My heart keeps singing, singing, singing all the time. I'm sanctified. I'm sanctified. With the Holy Ghost. With the Holy Ghost. My heart keeps singing, singing, singing all the time. That's Jesus' voice. That's Jesus' voice. Me in his blood. Me in his blood. My heart is singing, singing, singing all the time. Ever since my sin. Ever since my sin. Is taken away. Is taken away. My heart keeps singing, singing, singing, Incredible.

[00:25:20.290] - Speaker 1
Beautiful, isn't it? Yeah. Absolutely beautiful. So he brings me over to the tribe church, and it's still standing, the little old church that Church Bill. And the preacher there, the current preacher, Donny Chapman. And if there is a definition of spirituality, it's that preacher that I met, Donny Chapman. Whenever someone's there, some terrible wreck on the freeway, and there's someone dying, he gets a call. Four in the morning, he's there, and he's tending to that person. And so I came in and we filmed there, and I found all these people in the town, the African-Americans that remembered Birch and the impact he had. And then Dizy Gillespie's cousin came in, and he had all Dizy's notes for his autobiography, in which he'd written about how absolutely all this musical inspiration came from going to Alder Birch's Church every weekend and listening to that music. That was what inspired him. Amazing. It all came from that, the rhythms, the sound, and the thing. And so So the Triumph Church is part of a small sanctified movement across America called Triumph. And so all the best singers came to that tiny little village in the film. We had them perform My Heart Keeps singing in this unbelievably rousing wild performance and brought his memory back.

[00:26:52.800] - Speaker 1
So these are stories like this. So this was a guy that they chased the Ku Klux Klan out of Chirac. And this is music unifying this community. This is in the depths of segregation. And yet, as I said, all the white people would be open around that church on the Sunday just listening to that music.

[00:27:13.300] - Speaker 2
Do you think the fact that your first cinema experience was a Harold Lloyd with a live pianist that for you, music and film are just intertwined. Your love of it, they go together.

[00:27:28.720] - Speaker 1
That's a very perceptive through observation. I fundamentally think that's true. Yeah, I've never thought about that. Absolutely. I think you're absolutely right. Yes, I see visuals and live music performance as being absolutely intertwined. I'm really glad I came here today. That's really clever. That's absolutely, yeah. Because it was a very physical experience. There's this extraordinary imagery, but this woman, she's improvising. There's no score. When you go for those silent movie things, if you do meet people who do that, they improvise the music. I think the studio's occasion would send over some general cues. It was very rare that you'd have a whole score that was sent out. Yeah, I think you're right. And so I think that music and film are incredibly closely related. I think a movie has to work like a symphony with movements, and the whole thing has to tie together. And it needs to be themes that appear. So when you have a musical, there'll be an overture at the beginning where they play all the highlighted, like South Pacific, the highlight, the key melody lines, so that when you get into it, you go, Oh, I know that.

[00:28:38.430] - Speaker 2
Do you think that coming from the UK was advantageous to see it with new eyes, looking at American music with new eyes.

[00:28:50.760] - Speaker 1
Yes. I think there's a number of things I realized this research was hugely enjoyable because people were very, very kind and welcoming people in rural America, but they're particularly fascinating if you're coming in from Britain and you're coming into some tiny town and you're interested in this cultural thing that happened almost 100 years ago, particularly if a lot of them aren't even familiar with this person's there. So I would sometimes meet family members of musicians whose songs have been covered by Bob Dylan and Johnny Cash, and they had no idea. Wow. They had no idea that their dad's music had made that impact. But yeah, I think there's a number of things. Firstly, when you go into the rural areas of the South, you see huge amounts of old England there. So it's actually very familiar because these are settlers that went over Sometimes.

[00:29:45.440] - Speaker 2
And Scotland and Ireland. Yes.

[00:29:47.920] - Speaker 1
And I'm half Irish.

[00:29:49.360] - Speaker 2
And that's the roots of country music.

[00:29:51.540] - Speaker 1
It's the roots of blues. Taj Mahal told me, Blues is the combination. This is Taj's thing. And I think he's right. He said, Blues is the combination of African music with Irish folk music. It's those elements combined. That's how he sees it. I can't think of anyone that's been more deep plugged into that history than him.

[00:30:12.640] - Speaker 2
It's also interesting that after the American project, you go on Led Zeppelin, who are so totally influenced by American music. There is no English music in their vocabulary.

[00:30:29.020] - Speaker 1
No.

[00:30:29.660] - Speaker 2
It's It's a representation of America from far away, and it takes it to an extreme that most Americans would not take it to because they know too much to amplify it that much. Do you know what I'm saying? In some ways, the freedom that comes with this foreign thing that you can interpret and make it yours In their minds, maybe they think this is how it is in America, but really, it's because their love of this foreign thing is so extravagant. In their minds, they take it to this extravagant place where it never was before.

[00:31:17.660] - Speaker 1
I think that's a very sage observation. There's this huge romanticization of America and American music.

[00:31:24.900] - Speaker 2
It's like spaghetti Western movies. Same thing. It's like the idea of taking it to this extreme, this poetic extreme.

[00:31:35.020] - Speaker 1
Yeah, absolutely. That is why if you look at that generation and the subsequent generations, the love of the original rockabilly, the rock and roll music, there's nowhere more fervent than Britain for the adoration of that. It's usually romanticized, and similarly, the blues. The blues is just massively romanticized in Britain.

[00:31:57.380] - Speaker 2
And jazz as well.

[00:31:58.820] - Speaker 1
And jazz in Europe. Yes, you're right.

[00:32:01.360] - Speaker 2
American jazz in Europe is much more popular today than it is in America. Yeah.

[00:32:05.980] - Speaker 1
Yeah, because when James Reece Europe came in in the first World War with the Harlem Hellcaps, and he brought jazz to the European battlefields, That's where the French fell in love with it. So he's bringing in those W. C. Handy songs, stuff like this. And the French were like, what the hell is this? And this was, I guess, music brought in to rouse the troops of the Americans. But to the French, this was exotic and exciting. The Zeppelin story came out. We made American Epik. We made these three historical films. And the fourth film, our sound engineer that worked on Zeppelin, rebuilt from an original past, the full recording lathe, the amplifier and the microphone. So we brought a whole group of artists in to record for the first time in almost 100 years exactly how you would have done in 1927.

[00:32:53.220] - Speaker 2
Beautiful.

[00:32:54.260] - Speaker 1
And they all had to come in, do it live to the wax disk. And then we pressed up the records. Yeah. The first three films were the history of the Carthaginian Wars. And then the fourth film was like, we film a group of people crossing the Alps on the Elephants and doing it ourselves. So this film, I wanted to do one more music film that picked up from where American Epic left off, which would be World War II. And something that took us from World War II to, say, 1970. It's felt like a very exciting arc in communication and music. This is the arrival of tape and countless other things. And I thought, it would be good rather than researching 100 acts. And this There in my previous era, was super mysterious American epic. There's nothing known about most of these acts. Is there one act that rides that wave? I remembered that book I read when I was 12, and I went, Settling. And no one's ever told their story before. They're as mysterious as the Memphis Jugbed. Yes. The record's all known.

[00:34:05.060] - Speaker 2
It's one of the things that's so interesting about the old blues artist where there might be one photograph, like Robert Johnson, there's one photograph. Maybe with Led Zeppelin, they made it a point to never put themselves on the covers. They also had this mystery about them always. Before them, the Beatles were always on their album covers. Absolutely. They were pop groups. But Led Zeppelin was something else.

[00:34:32.330] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Zeppelin is surrounded with myth and conjecture. Yes. I remember as I got into Zeppelin's music after reading that book and totally falling in love with it, I remember talking to kids my age and contemporaries that were listening to it, too, going back and listening to this music and thinking that my sense of what this group was was different from theirs, having read this long, out-of-print paperback book. Yes. And I realized that with Zeppelin, the story has been codified by books published in the '80s and beyond that are looking back. They're looking from John Bonham's Death backwards. The interesting thing about this obscure little book that I read, they said long out of print, was it's looking forward. The end in the mid '70s, the end is not written. So the whole perspective in the book is from the perspective of these children on this journey. And they haven't even reached the end of it by the time the book is printed. So my perspective on this was, thanks to that little paper bag, it was very different. And the best book ended with a world of possibilities still.

[00:35:44.670] - Speaker 2
Yes, as does the film.

[00:35:46.200] - Speaker 1
Yeah. This is what you want in a movie. You want something. The purpose, I think of a movie, is to inspire people. I want them to walk out of the cinema and go, I'm going to a group, or I'm going to apply these things to something I've learned or something I'm doing. Anything you can do that helps you when you leave the cinema and go, I'll figure this out. This is what I'm going to do. That's the highest goal you can have as someone that creates something.

[00:36:15.440] - Speaker 2
And that's how the book influenced you. It wasn't so much about music. It was about following your inner light.

[00:36:22.720] - Speaker 1
Yeah. It was like, how do you make music? Do you mystify? What are the things you knew to do creative things? Because what we all do in this creative field, we're craftsmen. And I think the great myth about this is people tout around words like genius and things like this and auteur, as if we're touched by it. Certain people are touched by the hand of God. My experience in what I do and looking at, say, Led Zeppelin, is that it's an enormous amount of hard work, masses of incremental work that eventually becomes... It's so many bricks that eventually you have the great wall of China. And you're like, how the hell? You can see this thing from space. And this is the same here. And that's, I suppose, what people might term as genius. But it's very counterproductive to use those terms. And so what I like about this is it was showing you, the book was showing, and the film is showing you the practical things that you do. And then it lets the music play. You get to hear the music.

[00:37:21.240] - Speaker 2
Another part of it is that you can only put in that time if you really love something.

[00:37:27.860] - Speaker 1
Yeah. You got to really love it. So I was looking at this follow-up and I said, This is the story. This is the story we've got to make after American Epic. I said, This group takes us through from Jimmy's Born, and he's the eldest in 1944. So it takes you from World War II through to 1970. And I knew the exact point where I wanted the film to end, which would be with their homecoming at the Albert Hall. And so with all the films I do, I would never knock on someone's door and say, Hey, I've got an idea. I wanted to do a film with you. In my mind, I have to work out exactly how I'm going to make that film. And can I do it? How would I do it? So with this, I spend about eight months writing a script and tracking down archive.

[00:38:19.620] - Speaker 2
So this is in preparation before you've ever talked to anyone in the group. Yes. And they could very easily, and the general wisdom would be, they will to say no.

[00:38:30.880] - Speaker 1
Correct. I was aware going into it, that they had never participated in a documentary. Yes. They had never, ever sat down and formally told their story in any form to a biographer or anything like that. So they received wisdom I would be, absolutely would be no.

[00:38:46.680] - Speaker 2
Yes. So you spend eight months putting together what you would do in a dream project that likely would not happen. Your mindset was, I'm making this film with these people.

[00:38:59.200] - Speaker 1
Yes. That was my mindset.

[00:39:01.280] - Speaker 2
And you've not met them. You don't know them. I don't know them.

[00:39:03.910] - Speaker 1
In fairness, I had met Robert Plant. I'd been introduced to Robert Plant through a wonderful musician called Justin Adams, who discovered Tinnara when in all those great groups. Oh, fantastic. And Justin, that was through David James, the great music manager. And Justin had brought me backstage to meet Robert long before Epik was finished. And so Robert was familiar with our work. But I could tell what I knew of Robert Plant, that that would have no impact on, other than he came in the American Epik, so I thought, Hmm. But, yeah, so hadn't met them, and certainly didn't met Jimmy or John Paul Jones.

[00:39:42.360] - Speaker 2
Prior to this project coming to be, what do we know about the relationship between those three people at that point in time before you reached out?

[00:39:53.020] - Speaker 1
It was apparent to me that of all the groups, the major acts, and they've got to be in the top three, haven't they? No one does less publicity than they do.

[00:40:06.840] - Speaker 2
None.

[00:40:07.720] - Speaker 1
They do none? Yes. I mean, I think when the last big series of reissues came out, with the double LPs and the CDs, I don't think a Robert Platt, John Paul Jones did a single interview or post of any kind in their social media.

[00:40:23.980] - Speaker 2
That's two things I remember anyone doing where there was a concert that was filmed and recorded. Where they changed the way the songs were presented.

[00:40:35.620] - Speaker 1
Oh, yes, that was Robert and Jimmy. That was Robert and Jimmy.

[00:40:38.850] - Speaker 2
And that was sometime maybe in the '80s or '90s.

[00:40:41.710] - Speaker 1
I actually saw that show.

[00:40:43.300] - Speaker 2
How was it?

[00:40:44.340] - Speaker 1
Fantastic. It was pure chance. A friend had a spare ticket. No media. I knew someone. He said, Do you want to come? So it was all these interesting things. I'd actually got lucky in seeing these things. I was actually too young to see Zeppelin. So all these things that were pointing the way, this is your film. And then I got a last minute ticket to see the O2 show as well.

[00:41:06.140] - Speaker 2
And the O2 show also, there was no publicity. There was one show. It was announced. They did the show, and that was it.

[00:41:12.800] - Speaker 1
Yeah, exactly. So I think this is fantastic. That's what I love about them is they don't do any of that stuff. The thing that's exciting about Zeppelin is what I've often wondered apart from the musicianship, which Which is, apart from the extraordinary musicianship and the songwriting production is I think what makes them very exciting is when they appeared in '69 as the Beatles were essentially falling apart. This group appears that literally has no beetles in its DNA whatsoever. And of all the big groups, even Pink Floyd, there's elements of beetles in there. There's zero beetles in the zeppelin to my ears. And I think that was what the public needed and wanted after this massive, almost decade long infatuation influence of the beetles. This group appears and is so different in its DNA that it caught their interest.

[00:42:19.020] - Speaker 2
There's a moment in the film where you show the album chart with Led Zeppelin number one and Beatles number two. And I'll say it's a shocking thing to see because the The Beatles are still the Beatles.

[00:42:31.280] - Speaker 1
Yeah, exactly. As he said, a hugely important and fantastic group. And yet Zeppelin is so different in every way.

[00:42:43.280] - Speaker 2
I love Jimmy says in the movie, he played on everybody's records except the Beatles.

[00:42:50.060] - Speaker 1
It's like no Beatles connection. Yeah. And as you say, he actually plays with everyone. It's almost like it's destiny, this thing is. And Those things are exciting things where something comes in and it's the polar opposite of whatever dominated the thing for 10 years. Those are the things that are exciting. But also, they're the most difficult things to break through because nobody in the business gets it.

[00:43:15.410] - Speaker 2
Yeah. There's no point of reference for it. It's brand new.

[00:43:18.280] - Speaker 1
The media, by and large, can't stand them. No record company in Britain was interested in paying in advance for them. Incredible when you listen to that album. If you talk to Glenn Johns, which I did extensive background interviews, he brought that lacer of Alvin 1 and played it to all the prominent people in the music business. He told me he played the Mick Jaggard, meant to get them on the Rolling Stones Circus. Jaggard didn't get it at all, he said. And hired Jeff Rotale instead. He played it certainly to George Harrison. I can't remember if he played to other Beatles and Pete Townsend. He played to all these people.

[00:43:56.000] - Speaker 2
Same thing happened with the Beatles.

[00:43:57.680] - Speaker 1
Right. Yes, exactly. Nobody would sign the Beatles either. Nobody get it? Exactly. Yes, you're absolutely right. It was like rock bands are finished, isn't it? It's over. Because they were like... They had that Motown thing they loved, but they were really a throwback to their big things were the cricket Rockabilly. The Crickets and Carl Perkins, those songwriting Rockabillies. That's what they liked. And there, that was considered in late 1960. That was considered completely out of date, wasn't it? Yeah. God knows what those record companies were wanting to throw us into. Wasn't it all Bobby Darren, all this? It was definitely going super middle of the road, wasn't it? I think that's what the industry wanted. I think the industry wanted to get rid of these drug-taking, pot-smoking rockabilly musicians and replace them with entertainers again.

[00:44:47.920] - Speaker 2
What do you think made Led Zeppelin, Led Zeppelin?

[00:44:52.340] - Speaker 1
It's the sheer technical ability of these four master musicians. I can say that having made this film, it's been years editing this film, and however tricky it was to get it to the film it is now in terms of the way it's sequenced. When the performances were played in the edit bay, every single time I heard them, my heart would jump for joy at how amazing they sounded. I never got bored of that music. I was never less than elated when that music came in. So It's a combination of from the ground up, Bonham's drumming. Absolutely mind boggling. I mean, he's a Jazzer. He's a Jazzer with strong love of soul music. He's not a rocker. He's not on the four at all. Everything swings with Bonham. So the first thing you got is a rhythm section that swings. And I think that's so many of the groups that want to be inspired by Led Zeppelin. Unfortunately, they don't get it. That what makes Zeppelin works is the rhythm section swings.

[00:46:01.730] - Speaker 2
People mistake Led Zeppelin for heavy metal.

[00:46:05.680] - Speaker 1
Yeah, and it's totally not.

[00:46:07.540] - Speaker 2
And it's something else.

[00:46:08.260] - Speaker 1
And then you move to John Paul Jones, who literally didn't, told me, did not understand what rock music was as it was in the late '60s. This is not his thing at all. So he comes in with a whole different... So you listen to these things like Good Times, Bad Times, the opening track. I mean, he's playing like Motown style bass lines on these songs. I mean, no rock bass player would think of the playing what he plays. So he's got him with John Bonham. So you have Bonham's extraordinary patterns. His drumming is so sophisticated. It showed up technical flaws in how every movie is delivered to the cinema. I could hear errors in the way the DCP, which is the thing he lives in, the way that had been packaged because Bonham's drumming is so sophisticated. It It shows up if things are in sync. Then you got Jonesy coming in, weaving in and out of that with this extraordinary imagination. Again, this is a guy who's played on countless types of music. And then Jimmy. We opened the film, the second song you hear is the Johnny Burnet Trio, Train Kept the Rolling.

[00:47:19.740] - Speaker 1
And I got an original 45 of that. And just the sound of that is so ferocious. It's so exciting. There's no drums on it. It's a double bass, electric in rhythm guitar and a vocal. And I think, I talk to Jimmy, that track is like a total touchstone for him. So you have Elvis in Memphis, and he was working for an electrical company, and he was the driver, and the electrician was Johnny Burnet. So these two guys are in a truck together. And Elvis goes to Sun and does the sessions with Sun with this wonderful soaring voice. And Johnny is the hard core feral rockabilly, and he does those initial records for Coral like Train Kept a Rolling. I mean, that's about as aggressive as you can get. And I think it's just Jimmy's meat, that sound. I remember playing Howlin' Wolf with him, and he was like, his face lights up, that real feral, edgy, raw. So you got that in there. And then he was showing me at his house, Jimmy, he had this collection of early Arabic music. These are records from the '50s that he had as a kid. So this is sitar music.

[00:48:35.220] - Speaker 1
And these are rare records, but they were put out on his master's voice. And you could tell these were the original copy he'd had from childhood. So that whole Eastern music thing, he was into that from his childhood. So all that's in the mix. And he has this enormously broad session career. And then Robert. Robert had sung in almost every style he could imagine before Zeppelin. He's like a troubadour. So he'd been a mod. He'd been a soul singer. He'd been a Tom Jones type singer. As he said, throwing it against the wall, seeing if it sticks. But there was this big passion for blues. And just before Zeppelin, I came across all these recordings he'd made with Alexis Corner, who's like the father of British Blues. And it's Robert singing, and you can hear this template emerging, and this different voice emerges. He'd do all these things, but he describes in the film that as a kid, going to see Sally Boy Williamson on the American folk blues tour at the Birmingham town hall was like a life-changing experience. I think it's the combination of these guys coming together with all their different interests.

[00:49:44.510] - Speaker 1
And And the fact that unlike most groups, they're meeting as relative strangers in that room. Plant and John Bonham knew each other. They played in some groups together. But as Robert says, Pat's lovely wife had said, Don't play with that aren't it? Don't go near him. It's a disaster. So they were almost a covert operation.

[00:50:07.660] - Speaker 2
Because we think of Bonham as the Outlaw character in the band, but it was Robert.

[00:50:13.780] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I think Robert's the out of Lorish. He's the most outlawish. He's the most outlawish. He was thrown out of his house by his kids. So the great thing also about the Zeppelin story is if you're a kid and you're setting out on your journey, whatever that journey might be, and you have something you to do that is not what your school, your parents are telling you should be doing, whatever it might be, you are one of the four members of Led Zeppelin on that journey. They're archetypes. They're archetypes. So John Paul Jones, his parents are Vorderville entertainers, so they're in the theater business. The only difference is that John Paul Jones' father thinks bass guitar is a novelty instrument. In two years time, it will never be heard of again. Get yourself a saxophone. It'll always work. It's my favorite line in the film. I just love it. Very funny. And he goes, No, dad, I don't want a bass guitar. He'd heard Shaking All Over by Johnny Kiddin the Pirates and the bass thundering through the Duke box. He goes, That's why I want to play. He goes on that journey. He grew up literally standing on the wings of these shows.

[00:51:23.100] - Speaker 1
Then you have Jimmy, who I relate to a lot because his mother, like mine, was very supportive of his music. And all his school friends that he introduced us to remembered Patricia, his mom, as encouraging them to rehearse in the living room. And whereas Jimmy's father was more like, get your studies done. What's all this guitar business? But the mother saw something and she encouraged it. And then you have John Bonham, whose parents are neutral. But as long as you're paying for your kid and your wife, That's fine with this music. But there's always a job for you at the family building firm. And then the other end of the spectrum is Robert Clarke, where parents want him to be a charter accountant. And when it emerges, he doesn't want to do that. They throw him out of the house. So if you're a kid, you are one of those archetypes. That's all the four points on the compass. So that's another thing about the story that struck me is its usefulness. I thought everyone has an entry point in this story. You're one of those kids. You've got the support of both parents, one parent, mutual or no support.

[00:52:35.880] - Speaker 1
You're one of them. And so those are the things I'm interested in the film. What's the means? None of this film was ever approached in the point of, oh, this could make a lot of money. It never entered my mind. I just remember, I love this story when I was 12. And boy, would this music make an extraordinary score for a movie? So I had the South Pacific story. Which is in South Pacific, it's like this thing about racial harmony. And in Led Zeppelin, it's a story of a quest. And we had songs every bit as good as Barley High or Happy Talk with Zeppelin, Dazed and Confused. So you got this amazing story that's illustrated by communication breakdown. A whole lot of love, ramble on. So to me, it was like, that was what I was thinking. I was thinking of it like a musical. I wanted to make a film that I could go the Brixton Ritzie like I used to when I was a teenager, and I could watch it three times a year. That was a whole thought in my head. I wanted to make that film and with the best sound possible and take your-It's insane how it sounds.

[00:53:44.320] - Speaker 2
It's so good. Tell me when you first met Jimmy Page.

[00:53:49.380] - Speaker 1
So I'd done all this research, got a storyboard together. And so storyboard is where you create the film in pictures. So I'd written a script, and then I had this storyboard, a bound storyboard, and this is it here.

[00:54:06.140] - Speaker 2
Oh, fantastic. Yeah.

[00:54:07.560] - Speaker 1
So it's got a bit tatty now, but it's housed in a 19... This is a 1920s '78 RPM album, and I've taken the wallets out. And so I basically had the whole story depicted through. This is all their childhood.

[00:54:27.720] - Speaker 2
It's a series of photographs, both of them and what was going on in their lives at that time.

[00:54:33.480] - Speaker 1
Correct. Exactly. It's a young Jimmy Page. Yeah. Lonnie Donegan. Yeah. John Paul Jones. I hadn't tracked down the church yet.

[00:54:42.160] - Speaker 2
Because John Paul Jones played Organ in the church. Yes.

[00:54:45.160] - Speaker 1
So I had this storyboard ready. And I reached out. I wrote to Jimmy Page and said I'd like to meet, and I didn't say why I wanted to meet. And a meeting was granted.

[00:55:00.860] - Speaker 2
That's odd.

[00:55:01.780] - Speaker 1
Yeah. And it transpired when I got to the meeting that he was very familiar with American Epik. I see. And had watched all the films, and he had the book and the soundtracks. There were nine Sion track albums. All of this is because of American Epik, because of the work on that film. So I sat down. He arrived with some shopping bags, a bunch of them, which he put down by the door. And we were in in a hotel, and I pulled the storyboard out and said, look, I got this film. And I started walking him through the storyboard, and he became very animated and was making lots of observations as walking through. And it was very meticulous. I remember I planned to maybe spend two hours doing this. It was seven hours. Wow. Of just absolutely constant conversations. There was only a break in the middle. We went for afternoon tea up the road at the Orangery, which is where afternoon tea was indented. Wow. And so we kept seven hours going through and not stopping for breath, just I'm walking through and he's adding all these things and additional observations and going, yes, and this was the handle.

[00:56:21.980] - Speaker 1
And every now and then, he would just fire a question at me. So I think at one point I said, so this is the point where you travel up on Terry Reid's recommendation to go and see Robert Plant singing at a teacher's training, to think it was. And he turned to me, said, What was the name of the band he was in? And I'm like, Upstweedle. He goes, very good. Carry on.

[00:56:48.400] - Speaker 2
That's for you.

[00:56:50.820] - Speaker 1
As well, he should. As well, he should. I mean, I would. So what happened here is the storyboard is like 100 pages images, and there's not a single piece of text written on it.

[00:57:04.140] - Speaker 2
So you're telling the story. You're looking at the images and explaining the story.

[00:57:07.600] - Speaker 1
Yeah. So I have everything committed to memory, every date, every person, every place. It's all committed to memory. And so, Jimmy, in this process, it was very enjoyable in goating, but I realized afterwards that was seven hours of memory that I had to have. I couldn't look up anything. And so At one point, I said to him, Oh, such and such happened in May. And he was like, I thought it was early June. And I went, No, I'm sure it's May. It's something like this. And he went, Let's check. And he went to the bags he had brought, and he took out the bags and poured the bags over the content of the bags. And it was all his diaries going back to '62. Wow. I bought a picture of it here to show you. And so this is that first meeting. Amazing. And those are the diaries in front of him.

[00:57:58.760] - Speaker 2
Yeah, he looks happy.

[00:58:00.000] - Speaker 1
Yes. He's a really nice guy. He's a really nice person.

[00:58:07.620] - Speaker 2
Describe his personality to me.

[00:58:10.920] - Speaker 1
Super enthusiastic. I mean, total real love of music. He opened up the Dressbrook and gave me the numbers. He gave me the number of Rod Wyatt, who he was still very close to, who taught him his first chords on his guitar. I met Rod, and Rob was this just wonderful kid. Still this kid. He was like, approaching 80, but he was this kid. And he had this passion. I recognized, and I met all Jimmy's friends. I went, he's got the same passion for music he did when he was 13, 14, 15. He's never lost it. That thing of music he has is totally unjaded. When we would talk about things and we would talk about pieces of music that were entering the story, he just thought his eyes would light up when he was recording Johnny Burnet. He still feels the same way about the record, like when he first heard it. So I think what I loved about liked about him was just the joy, the excitement in it. There was no cynicism. When you were in the inner circle and you're just talking about the stuff, real enthusiasm. Out of him.

[00:59:15.360] - Speaker 2
Do you get the sense that he still plays?

[00:59:17.880] - Speaker 1
Yes. He came out and did like a year ago. They were inducting Link Ray into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. He came out and I completely other than that, so turned up and played Rumbble at that like a fucking champ. It's so powerful. Actually, I haven't asked him, do you sit and play? I mean, if I'm making a film with somebody, my relationship really centers around with them on the film. Yes. And so I like to keep that relationship about the period that I'm covering. So if it's from childhood to 1970, I quite like to stay in that zone with the subject. So when they meet me, their heads totally in that zone. And so if you watch it, you see the film, They're never in the film talking, looking at it now, this is what I think. I wish they'd known. They're in the moment. They're walking you through the film. They're living it in real time. Unless someone starts chatting away, which some of them do about things, I don't probe into the day-to-day specifics of how he might play today or whatever. My view is that that's a whole other book.

[01:00:40.970] - Speaker 2
The film is not who they are today. The film was a moment in time, and we're living it with them. Exactly.

[01:00:50.040] - Speaker 1
So the first thing I went through is when he's talking, the first thing I'm looking is like, I'm with this guy, and he can see... You make an American for love, Love. You don't make an American epic to make money. You make it because it's an important story. It needs to be told. And it's the last window before anyone that was there is dead. And that was the thing that fueled Epic. And he could tell when I walked into that room that I actually loved this story. And I thought this story was meaningful, and the world would be a better place, particularly for kids, if the true story of how this group did what they did was out there. And I just saw all those tabloidy books that were published in the '80s about large It was largely written by people that went on a jumbo jet with them for a day, a week or so, and hung out at some parties. Well, that's not how you get from 1944 to 1970. That's a whole bunch of insane work to get you to that place. And so when I'm talking with him, what was really interesting, he was like, he just got really infused.

[01:01:52.110] - Speaker 1
He was like, literally brought back that time as we were going through the pages. And because the film, as you see, is quite thorough in each of these I thought I was probably talking to him for two or three hours before we even got to Girard Street. So he was going so into this world. And then what was nice, I think, for him was that I had learned all this stuff or as much as I could. And so it became very collegial. You'd be filling me in on things. Well, actually, it was also this, and there was this. And so I could tell straight away he was collaborative. So the other thing that's really lovely about Jimmy Page is I know there's this So the image of him as this iconic guitarist. And of course, on stage, he is this. But the thing I thought was interesting meeting him, and is at the core, I think, of Zeppelin's story, is he's actually a very collaborative person in my experience. So when he meets Robert Plant, who's this 19-year-old kid singing an obstuedal, and it's just recommended by Terry Reid. He wouldn't have had any way of hearing Robert Plant.

[01:03:00.840] - Speaker 1
I mean, Robert had made some records, but it was so obscure. Jimmy wouldn't have been able to get his- Jimmy was already both a top studio musician and in the Yardburns. In the Yardburns, absolutely.

[01:03:11.380] - Speaker 2
Which were a significant band. Yeah.

[01:03:13.360] - Speaker 1
And I met Shell Talmy. I did about 170 interviews as background research this film. I'm going to talk to Shell Talmy, and he said, If you were trying to make a contemporary record and you couldn't get Jimmy Page or John Paul Jones, forget it. If you You need additional musicians to supplement a group because you didn't think the group was tight enough to play their first single or whatever.

[01:03:36.220] - Speaker 2
So they were the sound of British music at that time. Yeah. Unspoken, behind the scenes, but they were the sound already before Zeppelin.

[01:03:46.740] - Speaker 1
Yeah, absolutely. They were the guys. And Shell told me, he said, It ain't happening if you don't have those guys on it. Wow. Unless you're trying to do something middle of the road. If you're trying to do something that's menace sound, contemporine, it's meant to be standing to a teenage audience. If you can't get those guys, forget it. That's how highly they were regarded.

[01:04:03.300] - Speaker 2
It was also remarkable hearing that the famous telecaster was given to him by Jeff Beck.

[01:04:08.760] - Speaker 1
Right. Yes. I think he told me that... We knew they were childhood friends. I think he said Jeff made a guitar himself. I don't know why I thought he was thinking it was a bass. I can't remember. He made a guitar. I had the impression it was quite crudely fashioned. They go way back, and he said it was all about... I mean, they loved James They loved him. When I was a kid and I heard Believe What You Say, that single, good God, that Burton solo rips out. You're like, Is that even a human being playing this thing? It's just mind boggling. So he said, They were all like, Let's hear your version of My Babe. It would be in one of Ricky Nelson's tracks. Those kids, they were like, Of the rock and roll records, James Burton was the real touchstone guitarist. And he doesn't get props Ricky Nelson now, but those records are amazing. There's Burton. Burton is a guitarist on Susie Q. That's him, aged Ricky 16 or something. I didn't know that. Yeah, that's James Burton.

[01:05:09.540] - Speaker 2
Wow.

[01:05:10.360] - Speaker 1
Dale Hawkins, one of my second ever concert I went to. Yeah, but anyway, so So he goes up to see Robert Plant, and obviously, he's impressed and invites him to his house in Pangborn to try him out. It's a well-known story. He says, I want to do a reinterpretation of this Joan Baez recording, Babe, I'm going to leave you. I've got this idea for how to do it. And he's plant, sing, and he's totally thrilled with it. And they both know this is something incredible. And at that point, he tells Robert, I've got this band together. And Robert's like, No, no, no. Whatever drummer you've got in mind, you got to see this guy I know. And I think this tells you about Jimmy Page and why he's different from other people. He is the most Just experienced, session musician in London.

[01:06:03.750] - Speaker 2
He's played with all the greats, period.

[01:06:05.720] - Speaker 1
Exactly. And he's in the Yard Bird, so he's been in the counterculture. He's seen all those musicians up on the West Coast. I mean, who's had more experience? Yet he listens to this 19-year-old kid, and he goes to some gig with Tim Rose to watch this guy drumming. And I just think, how many people, if you're 24, whatever he was then, 24, and a 19-year of that you think is a good thing. I said, That's all right, kid, because when you're 19, 24, that's a big age difference. And yet he listens to him. I think there's a lot that tells you about Jimmy Page, that he's got this incredible focus vision about what he wants to do. And I think this is the aspirational, but yet he's open to ideas. And so when I was going through with him, I felt he's a collaborator. And all he wants to know is that you're the right singer or you're the right filmmaker. So when it got to the end of the presentation, he said, How do you want to do this? And I said, well, I want to do it with everyone, all the band. And he goes, oh, that's a bit more of a task.

[01:07:12.540] - Speaker 1
And he says, we have to get the other two on board. I said, Yeah. And he said, Well, I'll help it any way I can. But he didn't speak for the others? No, not at all. No, it's very much like a democracy. And And he indicated this would not necessarily be easy. Absolutely. He would be supportive and helpful. He'll be supportive.

[01:07:37.640] - Speaker 2
What's the next step?

[01:07:38.660] - Speaker 1
So I said, the other thing, Jimmy, is it needs to be an independent production. I'm making this as an important historical film. And as you can see, I'm bringing in the full film together. I want to make a film focusing on music and this musical journey, this inspiration. So it needs to be an independent film. He goes, That's fine. You make the film. And so from then on, I went to track down John Paul Jones, and he hadn't seen American Epik, so I sent a copy of the American Epik films to his manager and said, Would you just ask him to watch 20 minutes of this? And if he's not interested, you'll never hear from us again. And I think it was a day or two later, I got a phone call. The manager says, he wants to meet you in tomorrow. Great. You're free. Great. So we met at this club in Chiswick And I sat down with him. And that was in a magical meeting because John Paul Jones is the most press shy that does the least amount of media of a group that does no media. And John Bonham even less.

[01:08:45.680] - Speaker 1
But John Paul Jones... No, John Paul Jones might have done the least media of any of them. He doesn't feel any compunction to be glathering to the press at all. So I'd done a huge amount of research on him, and I was I was fascinated by his story. And so I sat down with him and started walking through the storyboard. And the first thing that struck me that I'd never seen in the few fragments of bits and pieces done was he's an incredibly charismatic guy, really Really funny. I mean, you see it in the film, can't you? I mean, he is a natural raconteur. And I was saying, I mean, I have to say, I was looking from a filmmaker's point of view and I was going, this guy's absolute gold. This is him comfortable and relaxed in a private place. And I'm walking through and I'm I'm walking through all these details about his childhood and his musical background. There's tons of stuff, like two hours before we get to the first Zeppelin where I sit and I'm into this. And you can see how I'm interested in this stuff. And so he's piling in That he had lots of stuff that is not known because he's the most mysterious of any of the Zeppelin things.

[01:09:51.880] - Speaker 1
If you look online before we started, there's not even a picture of his parents anywhere, which is unheard of with an act of that magnitude. Itude. There's always little bits and pieces. He's an incredibly mysterious figure. So he's every bit as mysterious as life as the 1920s Blues act.

[01:10:10.160] - Speaker 2
How would you say the meeting with John Paul Jones and Jimmy were different?

[01:10:16.640] - Speaker 1
Jimmy's meeting was very focused on all the details that make up the whole. And Jimmy has this real attention to detail. It's all the bricks make the giant castle. And so he's going through and you're going talking through the whole film, and he's essentially trying to ensure that all the pieces are there. And if there's any additional things, he's going, well, that led to This is to this, and this is to this, and then this is. So he's checking all the wiring. John Paul Jones was more of a raconteur, and so he was like a great after dinner speaker. He would try and give you the feel of those those times. So he was really was someone trying to evoke, like when he would talk about the vaudeville careers of his parents, he'd really try and bring you into those theaters with those acts. When he's playing his little band and he's chatting to this because all those little bands they'd play in youth clubs, and youth clubs are generally run by churches. And so this preacher comes up to him and says, Do you play the organ? And John plays a bit piny, he goes, Oh, yeah?

[01:11:29.920] - Speaker 1
He says, well, we're looking for an organ. Then we also need an organ. And Jones is just 14. Just says, I can get you an organ. So the priest who's actually a young priest, I think he's only like 24 or something. The Rev. Gordon Bates, I found out later. I tracked him down, the priest. He was still alive. He's now 90. The loveliest man. So he's the one when I tracked him down. He provided all the photographs you see of the church with congregation, because that church that Jonesy goes to, it was bulldozed a couple of years later in '64. I think he was there in about '61. And so all that stuff is completely lost the time in the Red Gordon Bates. And the Red Gordon Bates also had all these old cuttings, including a picture of Jonesy's first band, The Shadows, at the Youth Club. He had a photograph of that. And so amazing stuff. And so Jonesy was really good at evoking these places and the atmosphere. And I just found like I was in these streets with him. He talked about as a little boy, he wanted to be a studio musician, and he didn't get his dad to set it up for him.

[01:12:41.040] - Speaker 1
He went down to this street in London where all the musicians would congregate called Archer Street, which is in Soho. And it'll be like, you need a bass player? You need a drama? And he's there with these old grizzled old session musicians, this little kid with his bass guitar, and he gets a gig playing with one of the shadows, Tony Mian. And so I remember thinking with him, he was very effective at giving you a feel of places, what atmospheres were like. And so you see in the film, he's the one that really is quite evocative about being in that room in that first rehearsal. And he's like, there's all this equipment, and it's like, he so and so, meet so and so. So I thought he was brilliant because he made me feel like I was in these rooms, in these studios.

[01:13:27.950] - Speaker 2
At the end of that first meeting with him, did you get the sense this could happen?

[01:13:32.620] - Speaker 1
He said at the end of it, he said, he's been very engaging for the whole time, but he didn't make any comment on the overall film. And he just looks at me and he had this half smile with somewhat impassive expression. He looks, he goes, By the way, this is me excited. When can we start?

[01:13:50.620] - Speaker 2
Wow. Amazing. So next is Robert. Tell me about that.

[01:13:58.460] - Speaker 1
Robert was the only person person that was aware of us. We were on his radar, as I said, through American Epik. The person that really got me started in the entertainment business was Brian Eino. I was working on a multimedia project called Tower Inferno. And Brian Eino, I'd gone to see him and asked for his help, which he very, very kindly extended to us. And it was a very important thing about the Holocaust. I was the only Gentile in all Jewish production. And Brian lent enormous support and guidance to help get this thing. And I got the soundtrack signed to Island Records. And Brian recommended. I said, look, he said, you need an experienced person helping you navigate getting in funding for this and doing so. He recommended this amazing manager called David James, who managed Jar Wobble and all these people like this. And Justin was a member of Invaders of the Heart, Jar Wobble's band, Justin Adams. So these were the guys that got me into the business on the music side. And so Justin and I had stayed in touch through David James. And Justin then had become Robert's musical director for many, many albums.

[01:15:11.040] - Speaker 1
They were very close. And all those wonderful things Where they were going and playing in the desert and stuff like this. That was all with Justin because Justin's area is like Robert, it's hugely broad in that musical area. So Justin had been telling him about these guys he knew that were tramping around the South and had found photographs of Henry Thomas, photographs of such and such. So occasionally, I think some of these things we were finding that I was texting Justin were being passed on to Robert. So we'd met Jimmy, we'd met Jonesy, And the next thing was to meet Robert. And I was just reaching out to each of them individually in just whatever seemed to be the easiest order. And I didn't say when I made the meeting, I've met with so-and-so. And normally, at the end of the presentation, I think Jones might have said, Have you seen Jimmy? I said, Yeah, I saw him last week. Is he in? I went, Yeah, he's in. And he goes, So it was like that. So Robert had just begun a tour, and one of the first dates on the tour was in Perth, Scotland, which is where my producer, Alison McGaughty's family are.

[01:16:18.660] - Speaker 1
And so we went up there, and Justin Adams put us on the guest list of the show. And so we come backstage, and it's this big old theater full of people. But But wonderfully, for some reason, no one had been given backstage passes apart from us. It was like a dream, basically. So we're on our own in the backstage, Justin and Robert strolls in and comes and gives us this really warm greeting and says, I just want to say how much I've enjoyed American Epik. The films are amazing, the book and everything. It's always wonderful stuff. And he turns to me and he says, What are you going to do next? So I said, Funny you mentioned that. We'd like to do you, Led Zefflin. And he just looks at me somewhat blankly. And I brought a piece of archive. I thought, I would never dream of pitching someone a film at an after-show. But I think I brought something like a piece of proof of where that first rehearsal was. I think I got some paperwork because it's always been a source of mystery. It's on Gerard Street. That's been no. It's been some people that speculated, but generally, it was understood it was on Girard Street in Soho, which is Chinatown now.

[01:17:36.380] - Speaker 1
But the exact building until we did this film has been lost in the midsts of time. So I had some piece of research that I found that indicated the address of where that was. And he was like, I could see his eyebrow raise. And then we just changed the subject. And we chatted about lots of things and stuff like that. Super friendly. And at the end of the evening, he just, he shook hands and said goodbye to Alison and me. And then he went out of the room and he stuck his head back in the door and he goes, I know your game and I'm interested. Meet me in Sheffield. So a few days later, we went down to a show in Sheffield. We met him there, had this really nice chat, but he had loads of people backstage there. And then he said, at the end of the evening, he said, Meet me in Los Angeles, which is where I live. So it was like a few week, a week or two later, we're back in Los Angeles and we go to see him at the Orphium. And this wonderful concert. Really, really memorable show.

[01:18:34.740] - Speaker 1
And it was quite good. Actually, I really loved the concert he was playing. It was like a fantastic concert. Wasn't he? He did this version of Blue Birds Over the Mountain. It was a terrific show. I was getting to see these shows, each of these missions had to watch the show before meeting him, but I really enjoyed that show. It was very memorable, that whole thing. But if you go backstage in Los Angeles, there must be 200 people, then he comes in and says a quick, polite hello. He talks to every Every single person in the room really politely goes to the more. It's like two hours later, and eventually I said, We should go. She says, No, stay. And eventually everyone's gone. It's this giant room, and he's standing against one wall with his manager, Nicolette, and we're at the other wall. And then he just walks over and comes over and says, are we going to do this? I said, yeah. And he goes, meet me in Birmingham. So we go on a plane, we go to Birmingham, and then, God bless him, he walks into the hotel and standing next to him is Pat Bonham.

[01:19:33.600] - Speaker 2
Wow.

[01:19:34.500] - Speaker 1
And so I thought, you lovely man. You've spoken to Pat. You've told her about who we are. You haven't been pitching a film, but you obviously take- He understood. Yeah. It was heartwarming. He called her up and said, we should come to this. And I just sat down and went through it. And she came. She was so lovely. She came as a pile of photographs that had never been seen before of John Bonham, all these images. And they chatted through. When Robert saw the story, he was really funny. And I just saw this side of him. I'd never seen the media before. So open, wanting to be understood. And we're going through the story. And I remember you could see his spirits raise when he saw it went up to 1970. That was when it ended. And I mentioned this with him, and he said, This is so wonderful because this was a really wonderful time for me. He said it was before it was all formalized being into it. So he said, We're playing to these wonderful hippie girls dancing. And he said, And there was no plan. We were just winging it. Now, of course, Jimmy had a plan, but it was this energy.

[01:20:50.660] - Speaker 1
Understood. And I totally got it. I think he thought, yes, this film- And even though Jimmy had a plan, there's no telling what's going to happen. Absolutely. There's no telling. So for this was all the exciting. So I brought a little piece of paper up that was said, I think I got it here. I bought this little piece of paper up that was like, We're going to do this film, things so I could have something. No law or anything like that. He just signed it straight away with Pat.

[01:21:19.580] - Speaker 2
This is incredible.

[01:21:21.440] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[01:21:22.500] - Speaker 2
This is incredible.

[01:21:24.260] - Speaker 1
Yeah. He was like, I'm in. Wow. Great guy. So then we set up the interviews and we have a meeting with all of them, all three of them together.

[01:21:34.720] - Speaker 2
And how's that? And how are they different together versus independently?

[01:21:40.640] - Speaker 1
Well, you know that rhythm that you have that people like, they just have a... It's all of us. When we have like, if you put me in the room with my brother and my dad, I'm going to talk differently than if I were on my own. It's no different from any of those things. You just get a slightly different rhythm to the people. One person might be quieter than they are when they're with you. Yes. Another person might be louder. Yes, it was one of those things. It's very, when you make a documentary films. This is very common. Yes.

[01:22:12.780] - Speaker 2
Tell me the differences, though. Tell me in the group meeting, what was different?

[01:22:17.340] - Speaker 1
Well, I mean, this is a meeting to really formally decide, are we going to do this film thing? Are we going to allow you to make this film? In a sense, you can't make a documentary about someone without their permission to use the music. So I think in terms of that meeting, what was really cool about it was that they agreed that the film and supported the film, we should have complete artistic freedom to make a film. So collectively, they agreed that. And I thought that was unprecedented in terms of an act of that magnitude. And so they never ordered a frame of the film. And so they're not producers of the film. But It was very personable. They're very individually, very entertaining and charming people to be with. But when I was with the three of them together, that was the first time I had this sense of like, this is like a major organization. There was something about the gravitas for the three of them in the room together.

[01:23:21.800] - Speaker 2
Probably even for them.

[01:23:23.500] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I mean, those meetings are rare, as I understand. It was very them to organize. I missed that. So you felt like you're at a summit meeting of almost these three countries or something. Very cool. Yeah. So that was the point. So it was like, when they agreed to this artistic freedom and they were like, Yeah, you make it. Looking back on it, what I thought was really ingenious, we required it, but it wasn't like something we had to push for. What was really smart about it is that when they made a decision as a group that they were going to do something. And as you know, the last one was the '02. So these are very rare, these things. And that's one of the wonderful things about Led Zeppelin. They're not like pushing product down people's throats. They let the music stand for itself as I see it. What I thought was really great about it is they put all the onus on you, the filmmaker, because you go, I'm in this place that no one's allowed to be in to make this film, and they've given me the freedom to make it. So it better be bloody good because you got no to blame by yourself if it's not working.

[01:24:32.100] - Speaker 1
I thought that was on so many levels, it's smart. And so we set about putting the thing together, and then we did the interviews with them. And first, the other thing that's worth mentioning, they have incredible memories way better than mine, like astonishingly good memories. Don't forget, I've done 175 background interviews with everyone from Vic Flick to Glenn Johns to Rev Gordon Bates. Yes.

[01:24:59.060] - Speaker 2
None of which is It's in the movie. It's just the information you need to make the movie.

[01:25:03.920] - Speaker 1
Yes.

[01:25:04.370] - Speaker 2
The only voices in the movie are the band members and the music.

[01:25:08.260] - Speaker 1
Because they're alive apart from John. And so let the audience, they've agreed to let them talk. Don't interrupt them and tell the story. I knew after meeting them, I thought they're reliable witnesses. I'd done, I said, eight months of... I was obviously very familiar with Seth Zephlen before, but I've done eight months of hard core research. And so I'm aware when I'm talking to someone, are they credible witness. Do they remember things correctly?

[01:25:32.440] - Speaker 2
How did you find the Barnum audio interviews?

[01:25:37.560] - Speaker 1
So I started thinking, well, if we have all three of them talking, we have to have John in there. And I thought, God, this is a high bar because he was super press-wary. And so I thought, I've got to try and track down something with him talking. And I remember Robert saying, because I think I said to them, I want to have John to have an equal presence. And I remember Robert saying, How are you going to do that? It's I don't recall hearing anything of him talking more than a few sentences. And I said, We'll find it. And I think he said something like, Why? He did American Epic, I guess. He found all that stuff in the '20s. So how I did that was I tracked down every interview that John had done in the print media and anywhere else. And I contacted all the journalists, most of whom were alive, and said, did you have a tape? And in most cases, they either done shorthand or they discarded the tape or whatever it means. And eventually, I'm talking to Sam Rappalo, who runs the Led Zeppelin website, who's a huge repository of Led Zeppelin material.

[01:26:45.960] - Speaker 1
And he passes on this bootleg recording of an interview with Robert and John, and it's a really good interview. It's a short excerpt, but it's excellent journalist. The sound quality was not not good enough to be used in the film we make for a cinema. It was like third or fourth generation, but I could tell it was originally from a quarter-inch tape. And I could tell it was also a radio journalist because he was not talking over them, and he had an Australian accent. And so I contacted the University of Canberra in Australia, which is where radio tapes in Australia, that's where they get sent if someone can be bothered to send them in. Unfortunately, the University of Canberra done a giant American Epik Festival, So they were helpful. You had a relationship. I had a relationship. So I sent through the tape, an excerpt of the tape with the journalist speaking and saying, Can you identify who this is? And they identified him as this journalist from a Sydney radio station. And he was a stringer that had obviously been doing this interview in advance of their first Australian tour. I went to the radio station.

[01:27:54.380] - Speaker 1
They said, We don't have that tape. So I went back to the University of Canberra and said, Has this tape ever been sent to you? And they looked and they went, No, we don't have it. And then before I put the phone down, I said, How many unmarked reels do you have? And they went, Thousands. Because doing Epik, I'd found that with the Library of Congress and these things, there are pallets of stuff that get bequeathed to them that they receive, but it can take years to process that material. So they said, Thousands of unmarked reels. And so I persuaded them to start looking through the unmarked reels. And I think it was a couple of months later, I got a phone call and they said, go to your email. And I opened up the email, and there was a MP3 transfer, and it was that interview, and it sounded bloody amazing. And so I persuaded them to send the real in to our endpoint audio where our engineer, nick Bergen, we transferred it. It was fantastic. It was just like the dream interview. So many comments from him that other band members hadn't said.

[01:28:59.720] - Speaker 1
And And then after that, we found two other American interviews that just discovered shorter ones. And between those three, there he was. And as I said, he was never doubling up what the rest of the band said. And he was talking about all these things at the moment. I remember Jimmy saying, he said, in the funny way, he's like the star of the show, isn't he? Because he said, he's right there in the moment because his interview is so close to the events when they're happening. So he's fresh and he's got all these perspectives. Those were the elements that came together. And when the band turned up through the interviews, I said, all of them turned up with bags of photographs and sound recordings, everything I've never seen before. So Robert turns up with all these pictures of him from his different groups, but also a lacer of this track that him and John Bonneman in their group, Robert Platt and the Band of Joy, called memory lane. They'd written together, and no one had ever heard that before.

[01:29:59.440] - Speaker 2
So cool. Cool.

[01:30:00.380] - Speaker 1
And so he said, There you go. Have this. And all of them, John Paul Jones. I think this is interesting with Zeppelin. That's all I'll say. I don't want to speak for them. But what I did notice, and the lesson I say to kids, when they go for it, they go for it. They do it properly. They don't hold back. And I think those interviews in the film, they're super candid. Those are people really telling you what they feel.

[01:30:24.660] - Speaker 2
Where did the footage come from of the live performances?

[01:30:28.500] - Speaker 1
I searched everywhere, bar the Mariana trench for any existing footage. So there were two or three known performances that were filmed from that time and a lot of material that isn't been seen before. But there were two or three known performances The first thing I would do is I would track down the filmmakers or whoever had filmed it, and I'd go to those facilities, and I'd go through and get all the rushes in the original element. So with this film, everything you see on the screen has been in our hands. So like here. So this is the actual negative for the performance of Dazed and Confused. Amazing. So this is what comes into our hands. So we have all these pieces. Back in the days of the '40s and '50s, sound was one of the highest priorities in the Hollywood movies, and really hence the enormous attendance figures that movies used to have then. Now, sound is a bit of an afterthought in films. And so when we get these films in here, what we're doing is we're transferring the original film. We're able to do really high-quality scans. But what makes this difference is that nick Berg is probably the best transfer engineer on the planet for pulling audio off all these different mediums because he did the American Epik film.

[01:31:46.850] - Speaker 1
So he didn't just learn how to transfer 78. He has the original recording system. Each era of Hollywood, he has all the original mixing desks. So we were working on the mixing desk that they mix Oklahoma on.

[01:32:01.640] - Speaker 2
I see. Yeah.

[01:32:02.860] - Speaker 1
And so he understands all that material. He is able to record this stuff going in. And so he knows what he's meant to be hearing when he's getting the original mags of the elements, what's meant to be coming out. And so I experienced that when we were using the original 1920s recording for American Epic, I suddenly knew how the '78s were made of sound because I was making them. I was making them with Willy Nelson and Nas and Jack Why. I could hear what these things are going to sound like? When I would get the '78s from the '20s, I would know what was the product of deficiencies on that disk as opposed to what the actual wax disk it was cut to sounded like. See, all these That's one of the things that you get to learn from working.

[01:32:46.340] - Speaker 2
Every medium brings something to the recording, positive or negative. Correct. It always does something. We fetishize vinyl because it sounds so good, but it doesn't sound like what the tape sounds It sounds like vinyl.

[01:33:01.480] - Speaker 1
Exactly right. And so that's the fundamental thing of the movie when you watch it is actually what you're listening to. So with the Zeppelin support, we have access to master tapes, remaster of the Zeppelin material. But from Epik, I also started listening to the original disques, and I remember thinking, what are we going to give the public? As you mentioned, when you make a record-Tounds different. Yeah. There are three steps in that process. You have your quarter-inch master that Glyn Jones and Jimmy mixed down in Olympic for Led Zevlin one. Then that goes to Atlantic, and a production master is made, and various things are done to that tape to get it ready for being cut. Then stage three, a lacquer is cut by a George Pyrus or a Bob Ludwig. And that has a huge amount of stuff done to it, as you No. So in the case of, say, Zeppelin 2, Bob Ludwig hugely goosed that cutting of that record so that it has this extraordinary sound. In fact, that record is so loud that after they press the first, I don't know, 250,000 of them, they were getting complaints from people that had cheap turntables because the needle is moving.

[01:34:24.340] - Speaker 1
When you play a record, the volume is created by the needle moving more violently. So you have more dramatic peeps and troughs for the needle to be passing through, and that creates the volume. And so in the cheap record player, the needle will jump out. And so that Ludwig cut is like magical. And so I started assembling all these records. I brought a few here to show you. So this is the original Ludwig. This was sealed when I bought it. So I had to buy a whole bunch of these, what appeared to be very first pressing, sealed, hoping that there would be one of the Ludwig versions in there. And then similarly, this is the legendary first turquoise pressing of Zeppelin 1. But my favorite version when I was playing it is this version here.

[01:35:15.540] - Speaker 2
Did you A/B the sound on all of them?

[01:35:17.920] - Speaker 1
We had masses of copies of these records.

[01:35:20.710] - Speaker 2
But I'm saying you would pick based on what sounded good, not based on what you thought was-What sounded good. Reported to be the best. Yes. You always It went by what sounded best.

[01:35:31.220] - Speaker 1
Always by ear. So, yeah, with these records, what you have here is in America, I think there are four pressing plants, a pressing Zeppelin I, and each of them have different cutting engineers all approaching. This is This tape is a tricky tape. There's some azimoth issues on Zeppelin I, the production master that was made by Atlantic. And so they're trying to work correct for this. And so all these lacre cuts are very different, and the British one is different. So We must have had about, I don't know, 16, 17 versions of-What were you playing them back on? Oh, we were Endpoint, probably the best playbacks of lathes on the planet. And so we're going through these. And what I noticed is these original records, they have a quality to them. There's a quality to the sound. I went, this is what the public heard. This is what excited the public. I thought, why don't we, in this film, give the public what they heard in 1969, but on the best copy of that disk on planet Earth, played back on the best hi-fi on planet Earth.

[01:36:37.440] - Speaker 2
Which is not hearable other than in your movie today. Yeah.

[01:36:40.880] - Speaker 1
You can't hear it. Yeah, you can't hear this. But it's the truest sound to what was originally intended, because, of course, when these were made, when Jimmy's and the band or in the studio making these records, they completely know that the endpoint is that disk. Yes. The master tape is not going to be distributed. No. And in fact, the master tape is made knowing in mind that all these things are going to be done to it. So in the case of this example here, Led Zeppelin 2, this is this extraordinary cut by Robert Ludwig, which I remember Jimmy saying to me, this is the way to hear Zeppelin 2. Is this particular pressing. Now, this is made on the plant called presswell. Atlantic were notorious for using bad impure vinyl to save money. So Atlantic pressings are traditionally quite noisy. So this one here happened to be what we call a really good clean puck, and it's in one of the best pressing plants. And so this one was incredibly clean copy. So what we did is we're presenting this, and this is in the film, with no equalization, no no compression. All we've done is if there's any minor clicks in the transfer, they're manually removed.

[01:37:51.000] - Speaker 1
So you're hearing the music the way it was intended the day it came out, and we're serving it to a pineapple, cut off Off the tree in kawaii, slice it in half, and put on your plate. That's what we're doing musically.

[01:38:05.500] - Speaker 2
I've been listening to Led Zeppelin music for as long as it's been around, and I've never heard it sound like it sounds in the movie. And It's thrilling. It is thrilling, breathtaking. Thank you. So however you did it, it worked.

[01:38:25.360] - Speaker 1
For me, when you hear the studio recordings like Little Richard and Johnny Burnet, or again, hearing the original disk with those original lacca cuts as they were done. If you know a bit about early recording, those '50s records, like the Ches records, howling more from things like that or the early rock and roll records. Those cutting engineers were applying reverb as the lacquer was being cut. So when you listen to the original Chuck Berry records from the '50s, that's the Any way you'll hear that original sound is getting the original records.

[01:39:02.820] - Speaker 2
You can't read-It will also sped up often with the Chuck Berry records.

[01:39:06.390] - Speaker 1
Yeah, you're right. Yes, I've forgotten about that.

[01:39:09.160] - Speaker 2
Because they wanted Chuck's voice to sound younger. So they sped up the records.

[01:39:13.380] - Speaker 1
So there's this enormous amount of artistry that goes into cutting those records that 50, 60 years later, you can't get back to. So what I'm interested in the film is if you want to make a two-hour film about Led Zeppelin, and you think a film about Led Zeppelin is worth an audience spending 20 bucks and sitting in a cinema for two hours, do not mess with the music. And so my view is we're all here because of this music. So give it to the audience in the purest form you possibly can. And when I go through all the variables, the purest form is what you would have heard the day it came out. When they approved on that test present, you went, Okay, that's fine. That's the Finnish article that the public heard. So I'm giving it to you on a system, a copy in a system is beyond anything you could own domestically. If you're doing this story that takes you from 1944 through to when they meet in '68, you're hearing each of those pieces of music that influenced them or that they played on like Goldfinger. You're hearing those records as they were cut in '56, as they were cut in '62, as they were cut in '62.

[01:40:32.740] - Speaker 1
So you're hearing the exact sound of how those records were envisioned in each of the years so that you're taking a musical journey through time, a recording journey through time in the film.

[01:40:45.150] - Speaker 2
There was a damaged piece of film of Jimmy playing Acoustic guitar. Where did that come from?

[01:40:51.100] - Speaker 1
He appeared on a BBC TV show called the Julie Felix Show, and she was like a folk singer. They had a Two tape machines recording the performance, one of which there was some grit or something on the head of the machine, and so the recording was damaged as it was being made. The other copy was lost years ago. We have searched high and low for that everywhere, not turned up. So all that survived was that damaged tape. But the sound was undamaged. The sound is phenomenal. I went to see Melissa Quintas who is one of the VFX artists for James, Camerun, and Avatar, and she did some restoration work on film footage for American Epic. And I presented this to her and I said, Look, we can't afford the budgets of Avatar, but would you and your downtime look and see if you can approve this. And she very kindly spent months and months in the few hours she had off making avatar, way of the water, whatever, she would tinker with this and just literally frame by frame, try and paint out the worst of the lines that were running across it. And what she did is compared to the original tape as a miracle, the original tape would induce an epileptic fit or something watching it.

[01:42:12.320] - Speaker 1
So she did a phenomenal job. So there's no AI whatsoever in the film. Anything we've done is old school. But what was very touching about it is I remember screening the film for Jimmy before the restoration was done. Sometimes you do these screenings to the group, Just in case someone watches something and goes, Oh, I've actually got a photograph of that. And he watched it, and he turned to me, he goes, I do hope that stays in the film, that clip. He says, Because I imagine when you sell this film, there'll be probably people trying to tell you to take it out because it was very damaged then.

[01:42:49.760] - Speaker 2
It's still damaged, but it's one of the highlights of the film. It's so out of context of anything we've seen of Jimmy playing. We've never seen anything like that, sitting down with an acoustic guitar and killing it, which he does. It's breathtaking.

[01:43:06.540] - Speaker 1
Thanks. Yeah, and that's that folk side, that folk Eastern, Eastern side.

[01:43:14.200] - Speaker 2
What's the first time you got to see the film on a big screen?

[01:43:17.560] - Speaker 1
Directors Guild. I did a rough cut of the film, tailing the pandemic. And the only way we could screen in front of an audience was to submit it to the Venice Film Festival. And it wasn't finished, but they accepted it, and we opened the festival with it. And I took it to the Directors Guild Theater in Hollywood, and I screened it on that giant screen.

[01:43:37.370] - Speaker 2
And what was the experience for you?

[01:43:39.240] - Speaker 1
Oh, mind-blowing. All the work that we put in, getting all those original prints, all the original sound, that's when you see it blown up, makes it all worthwhile. But the thing that was the most mind-blowing was that I took the film, went to New York, and I went with Sony Pictures Classics and screened the film for Tom Bernard, who runs that company and his team. He's like the old Hollywood bosses that I read about in David Niven's book. I didn't think people like him exist anymore. They're like, shoot from the hit club of guys. No marketing plans, just like, do it. And if they're in, they're in, and they go for it. So I screen the film for him, and I just made some comment, and he went, okay, we want to do this. And he had seen Zeppelin live at the Texas Pop Festival in '69. And his head of sales, a guy called Tom Praxis, had seen the film. That's the guy that sells the film to all the theaters. He had seen Zeppelin on that first tour. So what are the chances you're with a studio with the two key guys had been to see the group in that period that the film is covering, that early period.

[01:44:49.620] - Speaker 1
So I knew we were in the right place. And I just turned to Tom and I said, Hey, it'll be really cool, I think, with this. I don't like this normal thing where you ram stuff down people's strokes, and there's posters everywhere, this giant marketing thing. That's so unzeppelin as well. It'd be really cool if the film was introduced like zeppelin were back then. It just comes in in the underground on the West Coast and gradually word and mouth spreads. And he took that idea and he ran with it. And he called up and he said, oh, you need to go and screen it for IMAX. And he'd approach to IMAX because IMAX have, I don't know, just a limited number of cinemas around America. I know it's like 500 or something like that they've got. And so we turn up to IMAX, and I have to screen the film, test screen it at IMAX before all the heads of IMAX watch it. I never would in my wildest dreams imagine that our movie would be on in IMAX. Imax, and I'm sitting watching it, and it comes up on the screen, and I was like, Jesus, this was made for IMAX.

[01:45:52.620] - Speaker 2
It really was.

[01:45:53.760] - Speaker 1
And I'm like, this is where music films live is in IMAX, because you know what it's like, Rick? When you have a musical thing, you want to be in that world. So your dream is to be inside the biggest speaker system and to be completely enveloped. No one wants to listen to music through a tinny transister. You know what I mean? You want to hear it big. So I'm in there. And of course, all that work, we killed ourselves to get our hands on every single film print, every photograph, and everything scanned at this extraordinary high level, so it could be literally projected on the Empire Street building. So when I'm getting into IMAX, I was going, Thank God we did all that work because you can blow this thing up. Huge. So I'm watching it in there, and amazingly, IMAX said, we'll do it. So what he had done, which was clever, is we ended up having this exclusive run in IMAX. So it's a limited number of cinemas. And the whole opening two days sold out. So it was like the way Zeppelin was launched. He didn't set up a single review or anything like that.

[01:46:56.840] - Speaker 1
No media. He just invited a bunch of interesting people to come down and watch it in IMAX. These are musicians and film people. And there was no instructions, don't post on social media. So they just literally told their friends. So that's how the word the film got out. It was not done through any campaign. It was just like, play it to a bunch of people, and they told other people.

[01:47:17.900] - Speaker 2
And how is it doing so far?

[01:47:20.580] - Speaker 1
I'm embarrassed to say in a way, but I mean, IMAX said it's their most successful music release of all time. Wow. Beautiful. Yeah.

[01:47:30.520] - Speaker 2
Beautiful, and it deserves it.

[01:47:32.500] - Speaker 1
Oh, thanks. Yeah. I mean, what I'm hearing is a lot of people going to see the film two, three, four times.

[01:47:39.040] - Speaker 2
Well, it's like you listen to Led Zeppelin, too, a million times. Why wouldn't you go see the movie over and over? It makes perfect sense.

[01:47:46.360] - Speaker 1
Do you know that's the funny thing about the film? Obviously, I'm working intensive in Zeppelin 1 and Zeppelin 2. I'll confide here what my hope was. When I made the film, that's why you got these full songs, and there's so much work on just giving you the pure sound. You know the way you get a fix and there's something you want to hear and you have a hankering to listen to, I don't know, it might be Beyonc or Howlin' Wolf or the New York Dolls or whatever it might be or the Beastie Boys. I thought, if you have that Yen once a month to go to early Zeppelin one and two, I thought, I'd love if I could make a film that could equally fulfill that Yen Yes. If I want to go into that zone, I could go, I could put the albums on and blast them, or I could watch this film for two hours and get all that music with the visuals and everything in a company. That could be an equally appealing proposition. Absolutely.

[01:48:46.280] - Speaker 2
The communication breakdown footage is incredible because the reception is so nonplust. Tell me about when did you first see that footage?

[01:48:59.160] - Speaker 1
One of the tenets of the story, it's a journey to America. This is an American quest. So as you said, it's like in Britain and Europe, initially, a certain audience had been nonplussed by Zeppelin and did not know what to make of them. So I came across this footage that had been shot for this French show called Toutansen. And when I looked at the footage, I thought, I got to go to the facility, the Toutansen Archives. And I went there and I got all the rushes for this and some footage that hadn't been seen before. Everything was shot. So if you look at the film, if there's a performance that is in the movie that has been seen, a number of people have spotted this already. It's completely recut with different camera angles. So you're not watching anything that is in a form that has been seen before. So we've looked at it as like film directors going, but this is a Hollywood movie. I would be hitting him, the bass player on this cue. The broadcasters missed the cues. And you see it all the time. The singer starts singing. They're still looking at the drama.

[01:50:08.760] - Speaker 1
So we are using the footage to correct for anything like that. So you're getting this super impactful performance. So I was going through the rushes, and I noticed these kids in the audience with their fingers in their ears. There's a woman with a baby in her arms. She's holding her baby, and she's next to her husband. And the band are blaring away. She's just shaking her head in just horror.

[01:50:31.880] - Speaker 2
People look bored.

[01:50:33.680] - Speaker 1
Yeah, they look completely bored. Amazing. And the band are just going through it. They're going like gangbusters. So what I was able to do was I was able to get these additional camera angles where I could pan across the audience. And if you look how it's cut, I've got other camera angles from behind the group, which confirmed those kids with their fingers in it, they're still there. Particularly on I-Mets, you can see that it's not You can see what the band is seeing, the lack of reaction. Exactly. And so what was wonderful about it was this perfect thing. It was like, the whole film is constructed like a Hollywood musical in that the songs are used to advance the story, so they're not Getting it over. What are they singing? Communication Breakdown. When Jimmy goes to try and get the deal in America, what are you hearing? Your time is going to come. So all the songs are chosen to work this way. But the thing in the film that was the joy was in terms of getting the story across. So they're playing for this European audience with their fingers and their ears that aren't getting it.

[01:51:37.940] - Speaker 1
Then they get on the plane and they go to the West Coast of America, which is where Jimmy had envisaged this was where this group was going to take off. And he saw that as the future. This was where it was about these long shows, albums, not singles in all this business. And he's on his way out there. When they get to the Film War, and This is the thing Jimmy told me when I first presented to him. He goes, It's all about that Film War show. We had this warm-up show in LA, but we were all sick with flu at the Whisky-A-Go-Go. But he said the Film War was the make or break show. And he said, If that show hadn't worked, it wouldn't have happened. This was where it happened. And he said, Because we were hitting dead center in the counterculture. And it was like, Here it is. And the world would have It got out one way or the other. And it was like, boom. And then, interesting, totally independently, Robert Plant said to me, he said that Peter Grant had come up to him before the show. And he said, You better be good tonight, he said, Because if you don't cut it here, it's over.

[01:52:46.260] - Speaker 1
That's in the film, Robert says that. Amazing. So it was all on that show. And so what's brilliant, what are they playing there? Communication breakdown a second time. You normally wouldn't use a song twice, but that version-It tells story. Yeah. It's ferocious. It's absolutely almost Ramone's intensity performance, and it gets over.

[01:53:07.840] - Speaker 2
How would you say each of the band members deal with the legacy of Led Zeppelin?

[01:53:16.020] - Speaker 1
You know, it's interesting. This isn't for me to speak for them. What is for me is to put across in a film what they're telling me, and what they're telling me is also informed as a filmmaker by, as I said, 175 background interviews. I'm trying to be in a position when Robert Plant says one sentence to me in a five-hour interview, I know that's important because I've spoken to all the people he grew up with. We don't often deliver some of our most important things in giant monologs. Sometimes one passing comment might allude to an enormously important thing. So you have to do that background to know what you're listening to. Yes. And And that background is you can be talking to me, and we're speaking English, but unless I really have looked into your background, for example, I don't necessarily understand everything you're telling me. I got to know what you mean. And so if I've done that research, hopefully, when you're telling me something. So I think in terms of this, my sense of it was off the top of my head. These guys strike me as musicians, professional musicians, decisions, first and foremost.

[01:54:32.600] - Speaker 1
I have no sense of that this was done for self-aggrandissement or to make money. I think the principal motivator was to make music. And to try and make music in the least messed with way possible, to have the most ability to pursue these ideas in the purest form in a collaborative collective hole. There's a point where John Paul Jones in the film says, When he gets to Pinewall, they're all about to start rehearsing properly. And he goes, We didn't want to be on TV. We just wanted to make music really badly.

[01:55:12.280] - Speaker 2
And that might have been different than a lot of other bands at that time.

[01:55:14.820] - Speaker 1
I think it's very different from a lot of other bands, because a lot of other bands, they all know each other. They've all sat in front of the TV set and watched the Beatles come on the Ed Sullivan show, or they've gone to see the Sex Pistols, or whatever their entry point is, or Black or whatever it might be. And there's this element of like, posing in front of the mirror with your hairbrush, singing and reading about these things in magazines. What's interesting about these guys is that you have two of them that are so fundamental, are seriously professionals, even though they're so young, they're professional studio musicians. And John Paul Jones was telling me his day was get up super early in the morning, go to, say, Abbey Road or wherever. And I think the first session might have been as early as 08: 00 AM, and that was jingles. Then there would be three sessions a day, and your session was considered total failure unless you got three songs fully in the can. I've never asked why it was three. You thought it would be two for a single. It was three. So whether it was the Who, the Kinks, or Lulu, three songs, and that's in a three-hour session.

[01:56:30.120] - Speaker 1
And you have three of those a day. Then he was writing arrangements. And so he would go home at night and be up until the small hours writing arrangements for the next day or the day after. Some driver would pick those up. Then he'd be off crack of dorm, mad hours. And he was doing that, I think, like six days a week. Professionals. Serious professionals. So you've got half of Led Zeppelin coming in as that. Then you have two other guys coming in that are from a really like the beating hearts of the band because they're from the West Midlands. So that's the home of Shakespeare. That's the home of Tolkien. So that's in those guys' bloods. I mean, that's the epicenter of British culture where Robert and John Bonham come from. People in Britain, London, where I grew up, will try and tell you not, but it is. When you go, they go, this is our well Spring here, up there. Anyway, these guys are coming in. They had worked so hard. From the mid-teens, they are every day out there trying to get gigs, playing gigs, meeting in bands, all this business. So when they get their first...

[01:57:45.650] - Speaker 1
I mean, Robert had made singles. He'd gone into London, made singles, but there were brief moments this would happen, and then the single wouldn't be promoted or it wouldn't take off.

[01:57:54.920] - Speaker 2
And he's 19.

[01:57:55.980] - Speaker 1
And he's 19. So when he comes in to this room with this 20 24-year-old and 23-year-old top studio musicians, I think the way that they're certainly operating the music group was shaped by the experience session, guys. Like as John Paul Jones said, it was like, you don't arrange songs in a studio, you come knowing exactly what you're going to do. Studio time is money. You come in and you've got it worked out. So my sense of it with them is despite the extraordinary flamboyance of the music and the wildness of it, the abiding feeling I have of this is that these are like master craftsmen. And it's hard to reconcile that with the appearance and the long hair and the thing. And this was like a gig. This was a music gig. It just happened to be a music gig that was enormously successful, more importantly, enormously influential. I think that's the thing that's probably more important to them, in fact, to guess was that it was influential. So I I got the impression it was all about music with them, which is why the film, and probably a little book I read made me feel like this, is why the film is very focused on the music and the making of the music is because in the time I had the pleasure of spending in their company.

[01:59:16.720] - Speaker 1
No one ever talked about money or rewards or anything like that. None of that stuff came out. I just didn't seem to register at all. It's all about music. I think that's probably what's been the huge missing part of the story. It's The fundamental part is it was done for music. And it's very telling when Jonesy says that comment, we wanted to play music really bad. How many people say that? I don't think most people say that. I don't hear people in interviews saying He knows when to play music with a band. They're not really like anyone else, I think.
