[00:00:22.540] - Speaker 1
My wife, her mother was from a deeply Roman family, and her father was Irish Catholic and war hero. When they decided to get married, both sides of the family refused to go to the wedding unless the other person would convert. So neither one of them ever went back to church again. It was like, Okay, then we're done with you all. If that's how you all are going to be, we're done. But she, because of her Roman ancestors, knew her heritage, and I didn't know any of mine. I had heard that the name Wallace came from Scotland, but that was it. And a cousin of mine had been in the army and had visited Scotland, and he had come back with it. He said, There are Wallace in Scotland. So my wife was a dancer, an amazing dancer, and she didn't really want to have children, which we hadn't had that discussion, but I really wanted to have children. So we're trying to work that out. And she loved to travel. And she said in her very Irish way. Okay, if you get me pregnant, you got to take me to Europe. If you agree to do that.

[00:01:38.460] - Speaker 1
And we were really poor. I mean, we didn't have any money. So I go, done. We'll figure out a way. We get pregnant. She's four months pregnant. We go to London, and we're just planning to go around Europe. And I said, Well, while we're here, Scotland is not that far away. Maybe we could run up to Scotland and I could see. Because I had in the back of my mind, I'd like to know. So we go up to Edinburgh and we walk into Edinburgh Castle. And there at the entrance are statues. And one is Robert the Bruce. And I knew of Robert the Bruce because I love history and I knew he was Scotland's greatest king. And the other one is Wallace. Wallace?

[00:02:22.340] - Speaker 2
That's my name.

[00:02:23.650] - Speaker 1
That's my name. And there's a little guy there, a member of the Black Watch, and he looks like he's about 5'4, and he's got on a kilt and looks just tough as pie knot. And I say, Excuse me, this Wallace. Who is this, Wallace? And he goes,. Greatest hero. And I'm, Elbow and the pregnant wife. Greatest hero, honey. Greatest hero. And so then I go, Well, I know Robert the Bruce fought the English. Was William Wallace as an ally of his in fighting the English. And this guy goes, no one will ever know for sure, which, of course, for a writer, is the magic words. But our legends say that Robert the Bruce may have been one of the conspirators who betrayed William Wallace into the hands of the English to clear the way for himself to become the king.

[00:03:22.500] - Speaker 2
Wow.

[00:03:23.560] - Speaker 1
And Rick, exactly.

[00:03:25.600] - Speaker 2
That's all you needed to hear.

[00:03:26.780] - Speaker 1
That was lightning bolt. I went, That might be the biggest story I've ever heard because it was like being told, what if there was something so noble, powerful in the way William Wallace lived and died, that it transformed Robert the Bruce from being someone who would betray the country's greatest hero into becoming the country's greatest king? Yeah. And I thought, that's like hearing Saint Peter and Judas were the same person, which in a sense is Saint Peter's story. But what if you go from the worst that you can imagine to being transformed? I've always been fascinated with what's the moment of transformation? When someone quits dating, when someone stops doing something that's self-destructive. What happened at that moment where the tide turned? So this was an amazing thing, but I I got a baby on the way, and I'm really struggling for money. And I also didn't feel like I was ready to write it yet. It was 10 years before I sat down to do it. Now, get back to Virginia on the way- Did you start doing research right away from that moment? No. I'll tell you a spooky story with this. I looked in the Encyclopedia of Britannica, and it said there are no reliable, really historical records about William Wallace, other than we have an idea that he lived, we have an idea that he died.

[00:05:06.320] - Speaker 1
But what we do know is that his stories have inspired his people for centuries.

[00:05:11.840] - Speaker 2
Enough for there to be the statue next to the greatest king. Exactly. So clearly there's something.

[00:05:18.180] - Speaker 1
Yes, exactly.

[00:05:20.120] - Speaker 2
Was he written out of history?

[00:05:22.440] - Speaker 1
There certainly was an aspect of this of when you get disemboweled and drawn and quartered and your pieces are sent to the four corners of the kingdom and say, Don't be like this guy. There's a suppression of his history. I met people that say they're descendants of William Wallace. I I really believe I am, and I'll tell you why in a moment, but nobody could prove they are because he was an outlaw. His children would have been killed, too. So if you were a child of his, you would have kept that quiet. Understood. I looked up what I could, but there was really nothing to find about him. So cut to 10 years later. I started to work for Steve Cannell.

[00:06:10.020] - Speaker 2
Steve Cantel created the Rockford Files and Barretta, a lot of great TV shows. What was it like in those days of television?

[00:06:19.620] - Speaker 1
Well, Cannell was amazing, Rick. I met him through Mike Post, who's probably the most successful television composer of all time because Mike He did all of Cannell shows. He did Steve Boczko shows. I think he does Law and Order and all those. His body of work is really amazing.

[00:06:39.060] - Speaker 2
How did you know Post?

[00:06:40.580] - Speaker 1
Okay, this is the greatest story. When people say, How Where do you go from a frustrated, broken, emotionally and financially broken, singer-songwriter who packs up all the stuff he owns in Nashville and to a Toyota and drives here knowing nobody. And how do you end up in the movie business? I was like, okay. So I always worked out a lot because it made me feel...

[00:07:09.120] - Speaker 2
Yeah. Endorphins.

[00:07:10.340] - Speaker 1
Yes. And I felt that I was growing rather than declining. And that was crucial for me. When I was in Nashville, I was working maybe 100 hours a week at this place called Opryland. And I really loved it. And that was one of the reasons I spent so many. But when I got signed at Tree Music, which was a big BMI publisher in those days, then I had a songwriting contract, and I would get up at 4: 30 every morning and write a song every day. So I had that routine thing going.

[00:07:42.380] - Speaker 2
Do a lot of songwriters that you know work that way?

[00:07:45.560] - Speaker 1
I don't think they get up early necessarily. But in Nashville, there is a big thing. Tom T. Hall said, You've got to write a song every day. And I've heard stories from, I mean, of course, you know McCartney directly. I know guys that know him, but they'll say if he sits down at the piano to write, he'll write four or five songs before he stands up. They won't be all finished. He does the thing. I love it in your book, you talk about the difference between my song could be better and my song isn't any good. There's two different ways of looking. Absolutely. I wanted to develop that discipline and that point of view I had to plunge in. And if it was a bad idea, get the bad ideas out of the way. But you don't know if it's a bad idea until you let it go. Absolutely. So I just wanted to get the movement going. And that always worked for me. People would say, what do you do when you have writer's block? And I go, I don't know. I've never had it. Never had it. Because I've always given myself permission to look at what I've done and say that's going to lead me somewhere.

[00:08:57.400] - Speaker 1
But to get there, it's like a sail So to me. Unless it's moving, you can't steer it. You're just drifting. So I always wanted to be moving. So I had a time where my income was just doubling Every year. And my career in TV was really taking off. And the discipline that I had, I get up early in the morning, get it done.

[00:09:25.820] - Speaker 2
Were there tight deadlines in TV writing? Yeah.

[00:09:28.960] - Speaker 1
Tv is The thing that I admire about it, and yet the liability in it, is that Tuesday comes every seven days, and you're running in front of a train. So you have to do it as well as you can do it in the time rather than as well as you can do it. In features, you get to say...

[00:09:48.450] - Speaker 2
Yeah, it's ready when it's ready. But in TV, it's ready when it's Tuesday.

[00:09:52.840] - Speaker 1
That's exactly it. That's exactly.

[00:09:54.760] - Speaker 2
And so-were there many writers working on the same shows? How did it work? Tell me the structure.

[00:10:00.660] - Speaker 1
They would have a team of riders, but the teams were really small. And you end up with... Like you have a team of horses, eight horses there. There's one or two of them that are pulling all the way. There's one guiding it, and probably one of them that's doing the main pulling, and the others are just along for the ride. There's a lot of that in TV. And Canyl recognized that. My attitude was I may not be the fastest, but if you give me the ball, I will score a shutdown or I will die. That's just. And also there's an exuberance about... Like a guy like Cantel, he wrote them himself. And Cantel was dyslexic, profoundly dyslexic. So when he was in school, he was at the bottom of every single class. And one of my sons is dyslexic as I'm saying. Most stunningly brilliant creator of stories. They just spin out like breathing. And cattle was like that, too. But then he found he loved writing. And Steve and I lit up with each other. And I got promoted really fast. He said it was the fastest he'd ever promoted anybody. But I went from walking in the door to executive producer in less than a year, and I was suddenly making a lot of money.

[00:11:31.280] - Speaker 1
Then there was a writer strike, and it went on and on. Because I had a long term contract with Cannell, which guaranteed me a really solid income for the next several years. And I was his protege. He had many protege, by the way, but they called me his Fairhaired Goy. Steve was a jock And I was the Southern guy, and so we enjoyed each other. So the writer strike goes on and on. I had just bought a new home. And because I had a contract that I thought made me secure, and I had been really frugal with my savings, but I spent my savings to remodel the house because it was like, one time we're going to make this for the boys to grow up in. And the strike goes on and on, and all my savings are gone. And I got sideways with Steve. It's a demente or protégé thing. If the protégé starts to spin upward some, like I had my first novels were being published, and Steve wanted novels. And I also had made a feature deal to write a feature screenplay, which nothing ever came of that. Because I was always looking down the line.

[00:12:56.980] - Speaker 1
And Steve and I got sideways a bit. And the strike ended, and Steve's company was starting to unravel.

[00:13:06.140] - Speaker 2
You think it was based on the strike? Did that impact that company?

[00:13:11.620] - Speaker 1
I think it was a combination of things. The strike did not help, but in a certain way, strikes helped Steve because he was so facile. The last several months I worked for Steve, the two of us together in eight weeks did six hours of television, which was just unheard of. Writing them all, producing them all, editing them. The whole thing was like... And it was just the two of us. So that's the thing. When you get into that crunch time, you don't have time to be developing other writers or have them write a script that may not come in and you have... Rewriting it is harder than just doing it yourself the first time. That's why it was just a ton of pressure in TV. In any case, the strike ended and Steve's company started to unravel and they weren't offering me a contract. And I decided I would leave. And I went down, I was packing up my office and my son Andrew were packing up my office. And he says, Daddy, how are we going to eat? And the weird thing is that I was wondering that. And I sat down and put him in my lap and said, Well, son, I spent the last several years doing really well making money.

[00:14:30.160] - Speaker 1
And making Mr. Kannel more money and making him more famous, but nobody knows us. And what I'm going to try to do is make us more money and let people know who I am. And he went, great. Sounds good. Hopped off my lap happened, but I was knotted up, right? And I got to the point that I couldn't write. Not that I didn't know what I wanted to write, but my hands were shaken and my stomach was knotted and I couldn't eat. And And I got down on my knees and I said a prayer. When my father had his breakdown, I was the same age as my sons were. And so what I prayed was, what matters to me right now is my sons. And I know my wife's going to be okay. She's smart. She's tough. I'll be okay no matter what. I could be a janitor, honestly. My pride is not such that I couldn't get something out of that. But I don't want them to see me come apart. If maybe they don't need to grow up in this house in Encino with five bedrooms and a tennis court and swimming pool and German cars in the driveway.

[00:15:48.400] - Speaker 1
Maybe they'll be better men if they live in a little house with no end or plumbing, which is where my sister and I lived when our father lost his way. And if that's what you want for them, then please bring that on and help me bear it. But if I go down in this fight, let me go down with my flag flying, not on my knees to Hollywood, worshiping what they tell me they want. Let me do the story that I want my sons to see. And I stood up and walked back without any more shaking, without any more knots, and sat down, and that led directly to braveheart.

[00:16:24.580] - Speaker 2
Did you sell everything and move to a small house?

[00:16:27.760] - Speaker 1
No. I was able to get through. I was able to hang on just by our fingernails. Worked out. Until a big script sale with a story called Love and Honor, and then braveheart. And so suddenly it's like I was doing the stories like I wanted to do.

[00:16:47.660] - Speaker 2
So you have the idea for braveheart on a trip to Scotland, and now 10 years later, what happens next with Braveheart?

[00:16:55.140] - Speaker 1
So I started by, I think you'll love this. I'm deep into your book, by the way. I know that this is right in line with what you're thinking. I've written multiple draughts of Braveheart without having any historical research at all, and none seems to exist. Even Winston Churchill wrote about William Mollet, but he said the same thing as the encyclopedia that his legends-We don't really know. Are the first people we don't really know. So I write this story, and I don't know if they have if glass in the windows or glass has a been a been, or if they're using crossbows or longbows. I don't care. If I was on a battlefield outnumbered, what would I need to hear from the leader to make me stay? And that's how I was writing the story. And I knew about Robert the Bruce, and I'm imagining the back and forth and all of those things. So in other words, I wrote the why of the story, and the why told me the how. So I'm about eight draughts into this, and I just said, well, maybe it's time if I looked up some of these facts to know.

[00:18:09.400] - Speaker 1
So I go to the library, and they have it those days, the Dewey Decimal System. The card catalog is still functioning. And I found three books on William Wallace, and they're all at UCLA. And two of them are commentaries, but one of them purports to be like a diary of somebody who is with William Wallace. So there's this kid coming to the house who goes to UCLA, comes on his motorcycle with a backpack and a kickboard and swimming implements in his backpack And he was a great kid. And I said to him, Hey, would you mind going by the UCLA Library? I've got the numbers. And he comes back the next Tuesday and he says, Well, I got the two, but I don't think they're going to be much help. They're in Latin, but there's this other one, and it's in what's called deep storage. It's like a bin of books that have never been checked out, and they're slated for destruction. So they put them in deep storage, and then nobody asked for them in the next five years or something. They're just destroyed. So he said, This one is in that. And they can't find it easily.

[00:19:26.020] - Speaker 1
They have to dig through the whole bin to find it. But I put in the request, and So a couple of weeks later, he comes in and he's got this book. Rick, I should have brought it today. This book is 270 years old. I mean, at Duke, and I'm sure at UCLA, if they think it's a valuable book, there's a rare book room, and you go in and you put on white gloves, and you can... But he's got in his backpack, and the thing is 270 years old.

[00:19:52.680] - Speaker 2
They were going to destroy it.

[00:19:53.920] - Speaker 1
They were going to destroy it. It's in Rhyming Scott's verse because a guy named Blind Harry, who was not blind, he was the Rick Flair of Scotland. He would go through the Highlands and recite this epic poem, and it's 200 pages. Of rhyming Scottish couplets, and it tells the story of William Wallace.

[00:20:19.860] - Speaker 2
That's how they remembered it. That's how he remembered it. That's how they remembered it through the rhyme.

[00:20:23.840] - Speaker 1
And it has this really elaborate foreword of about 30 pages, but the pages are like ash. So I read this thing, and it's got incidents that are in my screenplay.

[00:20:39.660] - Speaker 2
Amazing.

[00:20:41.100] - Speaker 1
The thing where William Wallace encounters a guy on the battlefield and he tears his helmet off to kill him and sees it's Robert the Bruce. That was in my screenplay, and that was in this blind, hairy thing. And I'm like, Okay, this has gotten really spooky. All It just confirmed for me that I was on the right path. It also made me feel that I was a descendant, even though I know this is all you could say. It's superstitious stuff, of course. But cut to we're filming Graveheart. We're on the field filming the Battle of Sterling. And there's an EPK promotional crew there. And the writer is just like furniture. But they go, Hey, did you do some research? They're asking I looked at them and I said, well, there wasn't really much research to do. But I mentioned this book. Cut to two years later, the movie is about to come out and they say, we're putting together our final press kit for this. And you tell this story about this old book. Could we come to your house and film you reading it? So I go, Sure. And so I get the book.

[00:21:55.540] - Speaker 1
I go up to this restaurant on Ventura Boulevards where I like to have lunch and write and make notes and think. And I open the book thinking, I'll find which passage I want to read to them. At the start of the actual text of the story, like after the preface, it talks about William Wallace and this man named Hamilton and Mr. Blair, who was supposedly William Wallace's personal chaplain. The body of the story starts and there's a handwritten inscription. And I'm sitting there and I hadn't ever read I did this inscription because I was so in awe of the book. And the inscription says, This book is the gift of Lindsay Dove to the Tuttles, London, May 1796. '95. And I look at that and I go, It's 1995. It's 200 years to the year. May 24th, the day the movie opens.

[00:23:00.220] - Speaker 2
Wow. Wild. How did it go from script to movie?

[00:23:06.320] - Speaker 1
Well, I skipped that part. I write the script. I give it to Rebecca Pollack, married to Hutch, Parker, Becky. And Becky is Sydney Pollack's daughter, and she got her dad's brilliance. I had written this story, Love and Honor, which is about the American Revolution, and a young cavalryman is sent to the Russia of Catherine the Great to save the American Revolution. So it's an epic romantic adventure. And Becky had tried to buy it and her company hadn't had the money, but she had put in to Dave Wurzchafter, who was my agent then, I wanted his next two scripts, sight Unseen. And we didn't even negotiate that deal. It was for minimum, by the way. But if anybody believes in me that much, I mean, I haven't known anybody would buy anything so great. So Great. So I go in to Becky and she said, What do you want to write? And I said, Well, there's this guy named William Wallace, and he ends up disemboweled and beheaded. But here's what he did. Rick, I don't think it took five minutes. And she goes, My God, go write that. It's really the strangest thing to jump in.

[00:24:25.560] - Speaker 1
A president of a studio called me after he saw Braveheart, and he said, Man, this is the greatest movie I've ever seen now. Don't start thinking you know everything. And I said, Thank you for saying that with all due respect. If I had come into your office three years ago and said, I've got a story about a guy that runs around the Scottish Highlands in a kilt. In the end, he gets disemboweled and quartered and beheaded. In the end of the movie, would you have thrown me out of your office? And he goes, Yeah. I go, What lesson am I supposed to draw from that? It's an honest question. Who am I supposed to listen to? So Becky became a big champion. And when I turned in the draft, I left out Robert the Bruce of my first draft because the script was going really long. So I thought, well, he's not really the main character. And Becky read the script and went, I love, love, love this. And she spent like 30 minutes telling me what she loved. Then she said, You'd mentioned this guy, Robert the Bruce, and maybe you ought to think about putting that in.

[00:25:38.980] - Speaker 1
In the generalist part. And I couldn't wait to get back and get to work as opposed to the people that go, Okay, it's good. Now, here are all the things wrong. And you spend an hour telling you what's wrong in two seconds saying they like it. You don't believe them. Becky was the opposite. So I had Robert the Bruce back into the story, gave it to her. She called and said, The strangest thing is happening. When we put out a script for all the executives to read, their assistants read it first, and they're in a big bullpen area, and they're all sitting there crying. All of them are I've never seen anything like it. And we think we've got something here. And he said, Do you want to play William Wallace? I said, The only one I can think of is Mel Gibson because he's-Based on what? He had the masculinity and the edge and the vulnerability, the legitimate-What did you see him in that was the example? Lethal Weapon was amazing in that he had this wild, crazy Almost fun streak. And he had this tortured vulnerability like, I don't know if I can go on.

[00:26:54.320] - Speaker 1
And he really played those things with enormous depth. And then he had played Hamlet, and then he had done a movie called Man Without a Face. Those things showed me that he had ambitions beyond just being the current...

[00:27:11.200] - Speaker 2
Action movie star.

[00:27:13.460] - Speaker 1
Action movie guy. So we send it to him. We don't hear, we don't hear. And then my agent calls me and says, Are you sitting down? And I go, No. He goes, Well, you might want to sit down. Mel Gibson wants to have breakfast with you tomorrow morning. Oh, okay. Now, it's not that I wasn't excited, but I've met enough stars from music and other things. When I was at Operyland in Nashville, I met a bunch of country music stars, and they're people. But I also know the valence that exists when you're around a person who could just buy a notion, just saying, I've always liked Vikings or something. And then you launched $30 million in development because every studio is trying to put together a movie to get this guy. And how people start to try to say, what does he want? And try to say what they think he wants rather than what they believe. So I walked around the neighborhood and I prayed, sincerely, please don't let me kiss his ass. I mean, those were the words because I'll have no value to myself and no value to anybody, no value to him.

[00:28:28.300] - Speaker 1
So we walk in and we sit down at the Four Seasons. And we're sitting there. It's Mel, it's his partner. It's the chairman of the studio. It's Becky, and it's me and Mel.

[00:28:41.560] - Speaker 2
And he's read the script.

[00:28:42.700] - Speaker 1
He's read the script. And he breaks the ice by saying, So William Wallace, Randall Wallace, are you guys related? That was the opening. And I go, well, it's like saying something causes cancer. If If you can't prove it. And I go, I can't prove I am, but nobody can prove I'm not. And he laughed. Rick, in like two minutes, I'm like a tent revivalist, and I'm leaning across the table and I'm pounding on it with my fist. And I go, Listen, here's how it is. The bottom line. Every movie has an underlying message. Whether it wants to or not, it has a message. And the message of most movies is, The guy with the biggest biceps and the cutest dimples and the greenest money and the bluest eyes, he gets the girl. That's what most movies say. This movie says, If you're faithful to your heart, even if they cut it out of your chest, you prevail. That's the movie I want to make. That's the movie I want my sons to see. You want to make that movie, you need to say yes. You don't want to make that movie, you need to say no.

[00:29:57.480] - Speaker 1
And everybody at the table sat back like, Oh, but Mel, lean forward. And it's like, this dude's in. And nobody says anything else. It's like, well, I guess we better get back to the office. And everybody's like that. And they all get in. We're standing outside in the parking lot and nobody's looking at me and nobody's talking to me. And my car comes and I'm driving away. My cell phone rings and my agent's, What the hell did you say? And I start, well, Somebody had to talk? And he goes, no, no. The chairman of the studio, Allan Lad, just called me and said, I want to double Randy Wallace's deal, and I want to make the next movie that he writes for us. He directs.

[00:30:43.160] - Speaker 2
That's incredible. Just from that first meeting.

[00:30:45.650] - Speaker 1
From that meeting. So the two scripts that I did for them, that studio, were Braveheart and Man in the Iron Mask. And I did them both for scale. It's like minimum. But the next script I wrote, Pearl Harbor set a record for an original script sale. So you know how it's weird. What you're getting paid is not specifically tied to the thing. So Mel, I knew he was in, but he wouldn't say yes. And it went on and on, month after month, and he didn't say yes. So I said, okay, I'm going to go to Scotland.

[00:31:23.610] - Speaker 2
What do you think that was about him not saying yes?

[00:31:26.320] - Speaker 1
He wanted to direct.

[00:31:28.160] - Speaker 2
Had he ever directed before?

[00:31:29.640] - Speaker 1
He directed one thing, and that was Man Without a Face, which was a tiny little movie. But he really wanted to direct this, but he didn't want to say that. So he was on the fence like, he's not saying no, but he's not saying yes because he wanted to get to He wanted to get to the place where he felt like he could make the argument to direct it. And the studio was wanting a big budget movie, but a big budget director. Can we get Ridley Scott? Can we get someone like that? So nothing's happening. And I decided, okay, if Mel doesn't do it, instead of getting $80 million, I might get $80,000, but I'm not going to not do this movie. Even if the battle scenes have to be just recounted over a campfire, I'm going to make this movie. So I go to Scotland and I find the guys who are battle reenactors on Highlander. They had had three broken noses after they yelled, Cut. I knew these were the guys. And I called them the... You know that British dial tone. And the guy's name, who was the leader of the clan, Wallace, is C-O-R-A-S, Wallace.

[00:32:48.480] - Speaker 1
So I was unfamiliar with the name. So I called and said, and somebody goes, hello. And I said, may I speak with Seora Wallace? And they go, who? And I I go, Serus Wallace? Shut us. You'd be looking for Shut us. Oh, yeah. Shut us. And he comes, hello. And I go, Shut us. My name is Randall Wallace, and I've written a story about William Wallace. And I have a movie studio that wants to... I didn't mention Mel. A movie studio that wants to do it. And I'd like to come to Scotland and talk with you. I thought the line had gone dead. I go, Hello? Hello? And he goes, I cannot speak. Standing up on the back of me fucking neck. And so I go, what? Then he goes, what would you like? And I said, well, I want to come and tour the Highlands and take pictures. He goes, Why? I said, I'd like to see you fight. He goes, why? And I said, well, okay, I guess I'll see you in two weeks. And he goes, Randall. And I go, yeah. He says, if anybody needs to die for this to happen, it's no problem.

[00:34:00.000] - Speaker 1
And Rick, he wasn't kidding.

[00:34:03.790] - Speaker 2
Yeah, you went into the movie.

[00:34:05.620] - Speaker 1
I went into the movie. So I go to Scotland with my life. We tour the Highlands. We filmed these guys fighting. I went and I had a Nikon camera with a bunch of lenses to learn photography, which I knew nothing about, really. And I made a slideshow, and I came back and I showed it to Alan Lad and Becky. And Laddie goes, I want you to show this to Mel. So I went and went to Mel's office. We sat down and I showed him the pictures and laid them all out on the thing. And I told him about these crazy battle reenactors and long pause. And he looked down at the pictures and he didn't look up at me. He just looked down at his pictures and he went, I want to direct this. What would you think of that? And I went, I'm all in, man. Be there right there. Whatever it takes. Full sport. And then he calls the studio and says, I want to direct.

[00:34:59.140] - Speaker 2
So And then was the studio open to that right away or it took time?

[00:35:03.500] - Speaker 1
They were open to that, but Mel wanted to direct and not star in because he really wanted to establish himself as a director. I see. So he was saying, I'll direct it, but I won't star in. And they were saying, You can direct it, but you must also star in. And they worked that out finally. And that, of course, I don't think it could have possibly worked out better.

[00:35:24.380] - Speaker 2
What do you remember about the shoot? Were you there for the majority of the shoot?

[00:35:28.800] - Speaker 1
I was there for some, and there was a real time when I felt left out. I felt like my father felt on my sister's wedding day. They were taking pictures and stuff, and my sister there with her new husband, and my father said, under his breath, to me and not. He said, She's got another shoulder to cry on now. And I thought it was one of the most revealing things of a father's love and how you have to let your children go and all of that. And I felt like, man, people would come in and ask a question and I would be, what? And then I...

[00:36:09.920] - Speaker 2
Not your job anymore.

[00:36:11.820] - Speaker 1
Not my job. Now it's got to do it. And we were having dinner in London, just Mel and me. And this was really funny, too, for me, Rick, because Mel was the biggest star on Earth at that point. And I was a totally unknown screenwriter. It was my first movie being made. And it was really funny because in England, people would come up to you at a table and go, Excuse me, Mr. Gibson. I'm so terribly sorry, but my niece just terribly fancied you. Could you possibly give me an autograph? And they would do that. In Scotland, a guy would come up with his wife and go, Hey, Mel, kiss my wife. And the woman would grab him. So it was really different. And we just got back from Scotland and we're talking and Mel's telling me about we're trying to cast a certain role. He says, I found exactly the right guy to play. It's a key role. I don't want to say which one because I don't want to say which actor. But he said, I found a perfect guy. He has no idea who he is. This guy, he's a terrible human being.

[00:37:20.560] - Speaker 1
Why would you want him in the cast? And Mel said, look, Randy, and I think Mel's super smart. And I think he could sense what I was feeling about everything. And he said, The truth is, writers write, directors direct, actors act from their essence as a human being. And I want to cast people who are in their essence the character I want them to play. And he said, This script is you. It is just bold and its heart is right out there. It is you. You gave your all to it. I'm going to give my all to it in the same way.

[00:38:01.780] - Speaker 2
From the time that he agreed to do it until the shoot, did you have a lot of discussion with him? Did it evolve much or was it basically the script that he read? That's what got shot?

[00:38:14.590] - Speaker 1
It's It's really funny, Rick. It went through a journey. I'd done a lot of TV, but TV is really different from a feature. And it was so wonderful to have this experience. We sit down and the first thing he asked me in our first story discussion was, Tell me everything you wrote and took out.

[00:38:35.540] - Speaker 2
That's interesting.

[00:38:36.470] - Speaker 1
What a great thing. And we went through a couple of things where he was asking if it was possible for me to combine a couple of scenes. There were, for example, the scenes in which his wife appears to him in dreams were really evocative to me. I'd put two of them, two dream sequences, actually three dream sequences before the final thing when he sees her as he's being executed, which to me was one of the best moments. When I wrote that, I wept. I didn't see that coming. Yeah.

[00:39:16.240] - Speaker 2
As the writer, you didn't see it coming.

[00:39:17.980] - Speaker 1
As a writer, I did not see it coming. I was like, I got to the end and I thought, the ax is dropping toward his throat. I can't show the ax hit his throat. So what do we show the audience at this point? And I thought, well, what would he look at the last moment of his life? Oh, he knows his friends would be there. So I wrote, In the last moment of his life, William Wallace turns his eyes to Hamish and Steven. And between them, she is. I hadn't seen it come. And I'm bald. I said it by desk that I'm bald. And I got to jump ahead for a minute. A few years back, I was in Austin in Texas doing a charity screening of Braveheart, and I hadn't seen it screened in a long time. And at the end of it, I stood up on stage, walked up to do a Q&A. And the first person who stood up, 19-year-old girl, woman, she stands up and she says, Mr. Wallace, I don't have a question. I just want to tell you something. My fiancé died six months ago. And before he died, he told me to watch Braveheart so I would understand the way he loved me.

[00:40:29.060] - Speaker 1
So I Okay. It took me, it probably took me five minutes before I could talk again. And just that sense of I knew for me it was all of that. And I believed that it was that for Mel, too. But you don't know. You don't know as you go through the thing. And there are some ideas that feel out of place, and there's some that feel like they're extending it. So there's a process, I think. I think it would be fair to say for Mel, if I think of the times when I've had a script that's come to me, and maybe I'm rewriting, but that I'm directing. Is you got to take it all apart and put it back together again. And the fact that you've taken it all apart doesn't mean it's a different thing when you put it back together. But in the end, it's probably more verbatim than anything I've ever done, including the things I've directed myself.

[00:41:32.020] - Speaker 2
Do you think that by taking things apart, you get to understand them better?

[00:41:36.840] - Speaker 1
I don't know, because there's a way of understanding. It's not the knowledge of every detail. When you're directing or when you're writing, what's the story about?

[00:41:50.240] - Speaker 2
So every decision is in service to the bigger goal.

[00:41:55.670] - Speaker 1
That's what I think. Yes. Now, having When I said that, the paradox is you find one twist in something that illuminates all these other things. When I'm starting to write a story, I'm just looking for any place where I find fire. I'm just writing a scene until a character says something I never said before, surprises me with what they do. And all of a sudden, I'm like, How is it that this character that I'm writing just surprised me and said something I didn't see? Or Murren appears at William Wallace's death. Where did that come from? Inherent and all these other things. Yes and no. I didn't see it coming. You'd think I would have seen it.

[00:42:47.170] - Speaker 2
If anyone would have seen it, it would have been you.

[00:42:49.620] - Speaker 1
If anyone would have seen it, yeah.

[00:42:51.220] - Speaker 2
You mentioned writing in a restaurant earlier. Is that a common practice? Yeah. Tell me about it.

[00:42:58.700] - Speaker 1
So there There are many different seasons in a day of writing. I like to get up early and get pages done. When I'm doing that, and I've started the day out that way, and it's a very isolated way of working. I like to go to a restaurant and sit with hard copy. Usually in the morning, I'm working with a keyboard, but I like to have the pages in front of me and either make notes, free form, and I'll write fragments. In that context, just having fragments is good. A few lines of dialog here or there, something else happens. It's unspooling in my head, and I'm just writing down what is popping into my head.

[00:43:57.080] - Speaker 2
I think it has to do with there being other people in in the space, or what is it about it that's different than writing at home?

[00:44:04.430] - Speaker 1
I don't feel so lonely. Well, a teacher, my son, who's the dyslexic one, really lit up when he found the right teachers, and they would tell him, You got to take breaks. It's like you're part of the dyslexia is that your mind is going so fast. It's like somebody who stutters. They're trying to get so much out. It's locking up at the bottleneck. So be sure you get up and walk around And so at a restaurant, that process happens automatically. Somebody comes up and says, Want some more ice tea? How are you doing? See people. I don't like it when people are coming up pitching me story ideas and things like that. Then I start looking for other places.

[00:44:48.500] - Speaker 2
Have you ever written anything based on someone else pitching you?

[00:44:51.480] - Speaker 1
Actually, I just this morning sold a project that happened because my youngest son was I was playing baseball, coach pitch baseball. So it was a little beyond T-ball, but very young, maybe seven years old or something. And I was dissatisfied with the whole program they were in. And I heard these kids laughing as they were playing. And I looked down at their coach, was this big, strong guy throwing the ball to them. The kids were just cracking them. They were doing great and they were laughing and having this. And I walked up to him and said, Dude, I introduced myself as, I'm Randy. I want you to be the coach of my son next year. And then I got a call from him a week later. He said, Can we have coffee? I thought that he wanted to talk about me being the assistant coach or something. And he had an idea about this football that he had played for the San Francisco 49ers and Bill Walsh. And when he first started to tell me, I thought, Oh, no. I just thought I was going to have a friend and have a buddy and baseball coach and stuff like that.

[00:46:05.880] - Speaker 1
And he was pitching me a movie idea. But then as it got up, I went, dang, that is a really good idea. That's nice. And then I ended up writing it, and we just sold it.

[00:46:18.190] - Speaker 2
That's great. How is writing a novel different than writing a script?

[00:46:23.640] - Speaker 1
It's fascinating for me, really. A novel is consumed within the mind of the reader, and in a certain way, that makes it a more intimate thing than any other art form I really know. And you only have the words to convey the story. Whereas with the screenplay, I actually find the screenplay is a more natural process for me. It's like when I started Braveheart, David Lean said, A movie is really like three or four movie moments, and all the rest is just stringing them together. Well, that's true and not. But I knew I wanted to have a scene on the battlefield when the Scotts are out numbered, and they're all about to run. And William Wallace comes in and says something. I don't know what it was he was going to say. But that structure-Do you remember writing what he was going to say?

[00:47:26.180] - Speaker 2
Oh, yeah. Tell me about that.

[00:47:28.040] - Speaker 1
Well, I write toward an emotion. There's analysis, certainly. If you're used to the structure of songs and you go, Well, I've got the verse and I've got the chorus. Well, I need to repeat the verse with different lyrics. And the chorus will be the same. And now we need a middle eight. You got that structure in your head. And I knew there would be a situation of, We don't know who this guy is. Why are we going to listen to you? And that they're about to mutiny. And what would make me stay? What do I most want to know? And I was informed, really, by two specific moments. One was just that I'd never really seen in anything else, which was, all the rest of you can run. I will not run. I will stay here.

[00:48:25.160] - Speaker 2
Where did that idea come from? That's a really cool idea.

[00:48:29.540] - Speaker 1
Honestly, Honestly, Rick, I don't know if it's the Jesus story struck me as being true, even if you don't understand who I am or what I'm doing, even if I sometimes don't understand who I am or what I'm doing, this is what I'm going to do. That to me went, that's true. And there are things that I I've had plenty of experience in my life when I got, this isn't me and I'm going to walk away. A job, a relationship, whatever it is. It's painful, it's hard, but you go... But the other thing is you go, this is where I will stand Yeah. As long as I- It's commitment.

[00:49:16.920] - Speaker 2
It's commitment.

[00:49:17.710] - Speaker 1
It's commitment. And I thought, well, I was fed that with my mother's milk. But also, if there are things that I was fed from birth that I looked at and go, that's not for me or that's not who I am. And others went, this is who I am. So I was stirred up by the thing, the stories of people who have drawn a line somewhere in the sand and said, this is the hill I'll fight on. And I wanted William Wallace to get to there. I had seen this Saint Crispin's Day speech in Shakespeare When he says, men generations from now will think themselves beggers because they didn't get to be here on this day. How glorious this is. There was another thing in C. S. Lewis when the lion that he writes about in Lion, the witch in the Wardrobe in the Chronicles of Narnia's Stories. He's hemmed up in a cave with a bear and a unicorn of the only ones left of all the people that have followed him. They're the last three survivors. This massive army of Tell Marines, they're called in the story, are there to kill them, but it's a cave because it's tight like thermopyli.

[00:50:37.240] - Speaker 1
They can't get out of them. And the lion, the bear, and the unicorn are just killing droves. So they send in a messenger and they say, We don't want the bear and the unicorn. We just want the lion. Now, we'll let you guys live. We'll put chains on the bear and he'll dance in the circus and we'll cut the horn off the unicorn and he'll pull a cart for the rest of his life. But you get to live. But you got to give us the lion. And the lion looks at his friends and says, What are you going to do? And they say, Of all the deaths we could have chosen, this is the one. That's great. It's like, I want to be like, They may take our lives. They'll never take our freedom. And that's where, like I say, every man dies, not every man really lives. Came from, too, because I thought, why ride in and put yourself in the hands of people that have already betrayed you? Yeah. Why wouldn't you just beg for mercy and live a little while longer?

[00:51:35.220] - Speaker 2
How are writing and directing different jobs?

[00:51:38.540] - Speaker 1
The big thing is that writing is the most solitary, intimate thing you can do. Directing is all about getting other people all to move in the same way. Directing is profoundly connecting with other artists who are themselves vulnerable and afraid at times, whether they are actors, composers, set directors. Everybody on the set has an artistic spirit. And I want to both be artistically moving in the right direction, but also directing the entire experience. My cinematographer, Dean Simmler, he was Director of Photography for Dances with Wolves, and he's an Aussie. And I never met an Aussie I didn't like. I mean, I never met one that I didn't like. And Dean was really artistic and really gritty. And he said that George Martin taught him that there's a circle of grace around the camera, and you want to preserve that at all costs. When you're there in that space, that's the crucible. And I feel that the director, more than anyone else, has to set the tone for that. It's fun, but it's like, this is sacred space. And of course, that doesn't mean that it's not dancing and joy. I've heard that Quentin Tarantino loves to play music loudly as they're setting up shots because he loves music so much and he wants to...

[00:53:16.800] - Speaker 1
And I love that. I've never been on one of his sets, but I love that, and I love doing versions of that with my group. But that, to me, is the essential difference is that you're creating Everything that you can see alone onto the page. And when you are directing, you've got to get everybody all pulling together.

[00:53:42.740] - Speaker 2
When you're writing, do you picture it?

[00:53:45.320] - Speaker 1
I'm seeing it. You're seeing it? I'm in the scene. Do you hear the words? Yeah. I'm in the scene myself.

[00:53:55.760] - Speaker 2
Are you playing a character in the scene?

[00:53:57.540] - Speaker 1
Every character. Gabriel Byrne was on a talk show right before Man and the Iron Mask, and I think it was Jay Leno and said, Why did you choose this movie? And Gabe said, Well, I love the script, and I think it's Because Randall saw himself as every character, including the Queen. A real Irishman's wit, right? But he was right. It's like you've got to stand in the position of every character.

[00:54:32.960] - Speaker 2
Would you say in some way everything you write is biographical? Yes.

[00:54:37.860] - Speaker 1
But I think you're also discovering, I think whatever rings in you, like that beautiful Hummingbird guitar. When I was writing in Nashville, some of the old Nashville hands had this belief that a guitar had certain songs in it, and when you'd gotten them out, you needed to give it to someone else. They might find some songs in it where you weren't going to. And my thought about that was it has a certain poetry in it. And when you hear an open E-cord on that guitar that would sound different from some other guitar, and that triggers. For sure. You go to a different place. For sure. And I think that- Like you hear different overtones and different harmonics from any instrument, and that can inspire different ways to play with it.

[00:55:29.530] - Speaker 2
Yeah. Interact with it.

[00:55:30.800] - Speaker 1
The smell of it, whether the strings are a little bit corroded or they're new and shiny, both of them have a different magic to it. Yeah.

[00:55:43.280] - Speaker 2
Place has an effect as well. Absolutely. I got to work at Abbey Road, and you walk in Abbey Road and you know the Beatles recorded there. So it changes your feeling. Yes. It gets very serious when you're there because you're getting to be in this place.

[00:56:03.100] - Speaker 1
Rick, the last three days of filming, We Were Soldiers, my father came out for the filming. When we were on our way back from Scotland, when I'd seen the William Wallace story, stopped off to visit my parents, and my father took me on a drive and said, This writing thing isn't working out for you, and you've got a son on the way, and you need to man up and get mature and do something to feed your family. Having He said that, nobody was prouder of me than my dad. He came out for the last three days of him, and they were the happiest days of his life. He was 78 years old. He was retired as a salesman. He went around and met everybody on the set. And he went back to Virginia, and he had a heart attack. And they did open heart surgery, and he got pneumonia. And I got the phone call to turn off the machines. And my dad had at He made the decision doable because he had said, Don't ever keep me alive by artificial means. But the doctor said, he's not going to get better this way. And we make that call, and I drive straight to the airport and get on a plane and land in Atlanta and change planes.

[00:57:17.320] - Speaker 1
And I'm in the air when the pilot comes on and says there's been an incident at the World Trade Center and all traffic has been ordered. It was 9: 11. Wow. So I didn't make it to my father's bedside before he died. So we finally get the rest of the family out when they left the travel bands. And we have his funeral when I get back to LA and we're doing the... I go back to work right away because that's what he would want me to do. So we're doing the sound effects of the movie and the background voices, just the general chatter. And this Vietnamese guy who had played an enemy soldier was doing Vietnamese voices in this thing, this sweetening, we call it. And he comes up to me on a break. And this is my first day back after my father's shooting. And he says in this broken English, he says, Mr. Randall, I'm so sorry about your father. And I say, well, thank you. Let's get back to work because I don't want to get emotional. And he goes, I'm so sorry. Let's just get back to where he goes, no, listen to me.

[00:58:20.160] - Speaker 1
And what? And he says, the last day on the set, your father came up and talked to me. And your father said to me, Where's your father? And I said, Well, my father died in Vietnam. And your father said to me, Then I'll be your father. Wow. Yeah. So I go on. When I tell the story, I say that I tell the guy, Well, if you think you're in line for an inheritance, you got another. But of course, I didn't say that. I just had to say that to get over the emotion. But a few days later, my editor said- This is why you could never talk to anybody on the set. That's right.

[00:59:08.060] - Speaker 2
It's so funny. It's exactly what you didn't want. I mean, it's a beautiful story, and you will have it forever. But there is work to do.

[00:59:16.780] - Speaker 1
Yes. And I was not going to get much done after that.

[00:59:19.880] - Speaker 2
No, it's a disaster.

[00:59:21.640] - Speaker 1
So my editor says to me a few days later, We need a Requiem hem for the end of the movie. And my composer nick Glinnysmith, had written this beautiful score. So we took a little piece of it, and I picked up a legal pad and in five minutes wrote three verses and never changed a word. And we recorded that at Abbey Road. We recorded this at-What's it called? Mansions of the Lord.

[00:59:48.460] - Speaker 2
Let's listen to it. I'm sure we can find it.

[01:00:01.220] - Speaker 1
The sea, when no rockets by, no bullets we Our broken brothers, let us bring to the land,

[01:01:02.920] - Speaker 1
Just divine grace, eternal light, in the mansions of the Lord. No more be, Lord, and church on the Lord.

[01:01:23.600] - Speaker 2
Where no mother's cry, and no children's we.

[01:01:36.200] - Speaker 1
We will stand and guard, though the angels see.

[01:01:48.320] - Speaker 2
For to the angels may we be,Yeah, so... Beautiful. Yeah.

[01:01:56.950] - Speaker 1
Beautiful. So George Harrison died the night before we recorded that. So when we walked into the studio, into Abbey Road, the hallway was covered in flowers and candles. So for me, it's a hymn to my dad, but to everyone else. And we had just the music first, and I'm all choked up. I'm thinking it's just me, but nick had invited this German composer friend. And when that final swell, this guy stood up and I heard him whisper, My God. I thought, maybe it's not just me. So we had London Session Singers and then went to West Point, recorded the West Point. And like half a dozen of the people that sang on that died in combat in Iraq. The West Point Glee Club is not for you to get out of. It carried Ronald Reagan's body from the National Cathedral singing that. That was the song. That was it.

[01:03:31.150] - Speaker 2
Do you know how that came to be?

[01:03:34.320] - Speaker 1
I don't. I own the copyright. So I got a call saying, Nancy Reagan would like your permission to use mansions of the Lord. Absolutely. And I was away at a speaking engagement in Chicago. And somebody said, Reagan Funeral is on now. And I ran to a TV and they had a handle and like Beethoven and Bach. And you. Yeah. I called nick Lenny. I said, nick. And he said, in Nick's English. And he goes, well, boy, it's something of an honor, but all the others are dead. Yeah, but we're not. So it was just an experience for me of you never know what will happen in all of the times of getting up at 4: 30 early in the morning and just writing, just grinding through and grinding. It was that discipline. I did spend a time in Nashville where I quit my job, saved my money. I slept on the floor. I did nothing all day long except writing reading, studying music theory, practicing guitar, practicing singing, practicing piano, going back and forth, all the... And I just went crazy. I absolutely went nuts. I was so depressed at the end of that. So like Jordan Peterson says, you find out what's too much?

[01:05:01.200] - Speaker 1
You find out that you need other people. You need to get up and walk around. You need to get out.

[01:05:09.020] - Speaker 2
How important is music in movies?

[01:05:11.960] - Speaker 1
I think it's the most important single element. Really? I do. In fact, I think you could tell a whole story with just images and music. Now, of course, Disney, I think, tried that in Fantasia a bit, without a given narrative. And it was more about the beauty of the images rather than the emotional story. When I was a kid, my dad was always looking for a deal, and he bought a stereo, and he bought with it a collection like the great works of music. And the 1812 Overture was there. And I would turn that thing on. I mean, I'm talking I was eight years old or something. Just full blast and just stand there and listen to it and move my arms like I was directing it. But You can feel the battle and the rise and fall and the surge of all that. And you turn the music off in a movie and it is absolutely dead. Not nearly the same.

[01:06:10.720] - Speaker 2
How did you decide to make a Vietnam movie? How did you come to it?

[01:06:17.120] - Speaker 1
So when Braveheart happened, it was like getting shot out of a cannon. This friend of mine had told me he was trying to help me get started in my career. He was a TV guy. But he said, Randy, look, I know you're frustrated and you look at other people and you go, I think I'm writing better scripts than I'm reading from other people. And he said, it's like those ball machines. If you go to a batting cage and a ball is in that rack and it just moves down just a little bit each time. But then it hits those spinning wheels and now you're going 90 miles an hour. And he said, I think that's going to be that way for you. Well, I'm sitting at home and I got a phone call from an executive at Warner Brothers who says, I nearly got fired over your movie. I go, Why? Well, because Mel, he has an office at our studio and we're supposed to be feeding him material and getting him to do his movies at our studio. And brave Art wasn't on our radar screen. And it wasn't their fault. They had never seen it or heard of it.

[01:07:24.700] - Speaker 1
Just had gone through Becky's Company, which is MGM at the time, and it went to Paramount. I'm sitting there and I get this phone call and they say, Kevin Costner has now read Braveheart and says he wishes you had sent it to him and he wants to talk to you. And can you fly over to Hawaii? He was shooting Waterworld. And I said, boy, I wish my father were here to hear this. I would love to fly to Hawaii to help Kevin, but I've got to fly to London to help Mel. I'm like, I got me. I guess I'm in the movie business now. And they said, That's fine. When you get back, we'll fly you to Hawaii.

[01:08:07.790] - Speaker 2
So this is before Braveheart even came out.

[01:08:09.720] - Speaker 1
It came out. That's right. It was in production at that point. So I'm going to fly to Hawaii. I go to a bookstore to get some books to read on the plane. And there was a cover called We Were Soldiers, Once and Young. And the title was so poetic and beautiful. That grabbed me. And it was a young lieutenant with a fixed bayonet, in Vietnam, which was really rare. I have a fixed bayonet when you got an M16.

[01:08:40.260] - Speaker 2
It seems like an ancient device. Yes.

[01:08:43.400] - Speaker 1
That combination of Like up close and personal, as we would say, where the metal meets the meat. Wow. Like, man, I got to read this. So I pick up the book, I have it in my bag. On the plane, I start reading it. The preface says, Hollywood has gotten the story of the Vietnam veteran wrong every damn time, wetting the knives of twisted politics on the bones of our dead brothers. Wow.

[01:09:10.960] - Speaker 2
That's a book for you.

[01:09:13.920] - Speaker 1
I get off the plane, I go to a pay phone, and I call my agent and I said, Somebody has got to own the movie rights to this. You tell them, I'll kill a relative to write this story. And he goes, I'll get back to you. Two days later, he calls and says, They won't sell the movie rights. They're afraid that if they sell them, that they'll give them to somebody that will home their twisted politics on the bones. They will not sell them. So I said, Find a number. So I call the guy. I didn't get general more. I got Joe Galloway, the journalist. And I said, Look, you've never heard of me. I've written a story called Braveheart. I'm going to send you the script. You read that, and if you like it, call me. If you don't, no harm, no foul. Two days later, they call me? Let's talk. And I go, Do you believe in heroes? Did you read what I said? And so I said, Look, I have the juice now, right now, the heat to call a studio and say, buy this for me and we'll make it. But if we do that, they will be in control.

[01:10:22.300] - Speaker 1
No matter what they say, they'll own it. If you let me buy it with my own money, I I will pay you less than they would pay you upfront. But I'll make you a deal that in success, you'll make more money than you ever would have made with them.

[01:10:38.980] - Speaker 2
And the control. They can trust you. They can't trust them.

[01:10:43.210] - Speaker 1
Exactly. I said, If you don't like what I do, you'll know who to come shoot. And they went, Deal. And then from that day on, they were just right in my corner.

[01:10:55.040] - Speaker 2
When Braveheart came out, how was it received?

[01:10:59.260] - Speaker 1
Funny thing, Braveheart did in a day when a movie might open at $30 or $40 million, it opened at $8 or maybe $12.

[01:11:12.660] - Speaker 2
So it didn't explode?

[01:11:14.170] - Speaker 1
Uh-uh. And mainly because of its running time.

[01:11:17.900] - Speaker 2
How was the press reaction to it?

[01:11:21.060] - Speaker 1
The initial reaction was they lumped it as an action movie. They treated it like it was Lethal Weapon 7 or something.

[01:11:28.650] - Speaker 2
Which is not.

[01:11:29.620] - Speaker 1
And And it was reviewed in Time or news week. One of them had a review. They lumped it in with Die Hard 2 under the heading It's Summer, Let the Mayhem Begin. But it was then the audience reaction that started to cause... Then the reviewers were going, No, you need to take a look. This movie has substance. But its initial thing was, Oh, it's just hacking and stuff like that.

[01:11:56.560] - Speaker 2
And how long did it take to really get going?

[01:11:59.480] - Speaker 1
So they They released it, and it was out for about three weeks, and the studio pulled the release. They pulled it off the market. Why is that? Because they felt that it wasn't getting the traction that it ought to have. They knew from the audience reactions and their own reactions that people were sitting outside the theaters discussing it, and women were gathered and like, I want a man like that.

[01:12:27.640] - Speaker 2
It wasn't building an audience. So they pulled it off.

[01:12:31.860] - Speaker 1
And what happened? And they came out again with it. They thought, okay, we're at the wrong time. It's not a summer movie. It's a winter movie. It's a more thoughtful. So they came out again right around Thanksgiving.

[01:12:43.600] - Speaker 2
So how many months between the three weeks of then coming back out?

[01:12:47.400] - Speaker 1
Well, from the end of May till Thanksgiving.

[01:12:51.250] - Speaker 2
I never heard of that happening before. Is that a common practice?

[01:12:54.640] - Speaker 1
No, not common. And they brought it out again in the winter.

[01:12:58.310] - Speaker 2
So they rereleased the movie?

[01:13:00.670] - Speaker 1
Rereleased it the second time, and it did okay again. One of the problems was, say you've got a thousand theaters and you got a two-hour movie, then you can have four showings or even five a day. But with a three-hour movie, then you're really getting two a day. I see. So we're only getting half the return. I see.

[01:13:23.940] - Speaker 2
For the same amount of time.

[01:13:25.450] - Speaker 1
For the same amount of time.

[01:13:26.420] - Speaker 2
Yeah, same number of days, only half as many screenings because It's the movie is twice as long.

[01:13:31.110] - Speaker 1
Exactly. I understand. Exactly.

[01:13:33.260] - Speaker 2
So it's tricky on the box office because it looks like you're doing half as good for the same number of people going to see the movie.

[01:13:41.020] - Speaker 1
That's right. Yeah, exactly right. Yeah, I understand. And the word of mouth was just phenomenal. But it wasn't reflecting in the number of screens in the box office that we were getting. So they came out with it a second time in the winter of '95. And then when it got all the nominations for awards, they released it again, the third time. So the total box- I've never heard of anything like this before. True story.

[01:14:09.340] - Speaker 2
Yeah, that's wild.

[01:14:10.660] - Speaker 1
The domestic box office was for Braveheart. Yeah. Was around 50 or 60. It was not. The international was massive, like 300 or something. Wow. And that was in today's... So it would have been near-So how did it go from from mediocre theatrical success to being such a culturally significant movie?

[01:14:36.940] - Speaker 2
And how did that happen?

[01:14:39.720] - Speaker 1
My take on it is, and of course, I'm biased, but is that it was the depth of its penetration into people watching. It wasn't like, I like this movie. It wasn't even like, I love this movie. It was like this. I feel this. I feel this movie. How did Mel feel about it all? He had given so much. I once met a woman that I think it was Clint Eastwood's first wife. They had long since divorced, but I asked her about Clint's process and things like that. She said when he's directed and acted, that for the first month or so when he comes home, he can barely week. He's just so depleted. Too much. And Mel had just... He had given all of that. But I think he felt the wave of reaction happening. People were calling like Ridley Scott, people like that that you look up to and you're going, Hey, man, this is a great movie. And I think he was starting to feel that. But we all were thinking the box office would be way bigger than we were seeing so far. So it took a while to get going.

[01:16:03.460] - Speaker 2
And then it won best picture.

[01:16:05.330] - Speaker 1
Oh, yeah. Yeah. One best picture.

[01:16:07.940] - Speaker 2
That's amazing. Yeah. Amazing. Amazing story.

[01:16:10.910] - Speaker 1
And then the DVD, they were massive.

[01:16:15.820] - Speaker 2
Do you write for a particular audience?

[01:16:21.540] - Speaker 1
Yeah, actually, I do. So I had an Uncle Lawton. They called him Uncle Toad, but he was a Big, strong, handsome, intense guy. A lot of people were afraid of him, but he had an enormously soft heart. And I remember when I was in school and The first week I was in college, and I was getting to go to college when my parents had always dreamed of having an education but hadn't been able to have one. So their dream was to save their money so my sister and I could go to college. And the first week I'm there, this guy in orientation said, your education is going to separate you from all the people back home. They won't have the sophistication. They won't have the... I remember thinking, What education is that? Maybe they don't use bigger words than they need to use. Maybe they don't make references to German philosophical theology. But that didn't mean they don't know more. It didn't mean they're not. And I'm going to write for them.

[01:17:33.310] - Speaker 2
For everybody.

[01:17:34.730] - Speaker 1
Yeah, that's right. It's for everybody.

[01:17:36.630] - Speaker 2
How would you describe the part of you that's unchanging, that's always been there since childhood?

[01:17:43.340] - Speaker 1
There's a way in what Which I feel I'm exactly the same person. I look out at the world and think I look to the world the way I've always been. When I I look in a mirror and go, You're older than me. My mother was an extraordinarily beautiful woman. And one of my cousins told me that when my father first took her to a Wallace family reunion, and she was maybe 19, he said, I saw your mother. And I said, That's the most beautiful woman I've ever seen. And it was really funny because my mother was really uncomfortable with being attractive. There had been a family scandal where all this shame had been brought on the family by her grandmother had her father out of wedlock, and she was shunned. From the moment of her pregnancy reveal, she never went into public again. So now my mother comes along and she's just this extraordinary beauty and just wants to hide it in any way she can, wants to suppress it. You're not supposed to be magnetic and attractive, certainly not erotic. Those things are out of the question. That was in the water in which I swam, and I was never even aware of it, how puritanical my upbringing was.

[01:19:13.660] - Speaker 1
But even in that context, I was still me. The artist part of, This is who I am. I'm not like anybody else. I'm not going to have other people decide who I am for me. When When I met Steve Cannell, he became my first mentor in writing, he said, You don't let them grade your paper.

[01:19:38.900] - Speaker 2
Are you always writing, would you say?

[01:19:42.860] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I don't think I'm never not writing. In fact, I always have multiple pens because they're like, Ammo. I got friends in Mississippi that carry, always carry a couple of weapons and several clips of ammo. And I go, Isn't that like a lot of bird?

[01:20:01.620] - Speaker 2
Do you write longhand? Is that how you write?

[01:20:03.480] - Speaker 1
Sometimes. I've got the pen, so I write on napkins. That's the greatest.

[01:20:09.200] - Speaker 2
It just happens when you're out in the world. Yeah.

[01:20:12.260] - Speaker 1
It's like, you got to get this down. I got to get this. And then With my phone, I use the voice memos.

[01:20:17.780] - Speaker 2
When you get something, would it be a line or will it be a story idea? What would be some of the things you might note down?

[01:20:27.120] - Speaker 1
It's generally a situation, a scene, and that scene implies a whole story. And once I start with the scene thinking about that, like one of those sci-fi movies where the plants that eat the house, it just comes up and it goes in that direction.

[01:20:46.380] - Speaker 2
Would you say everything you've written started with a scene? Or is there a concept before a scene?

[01:20:53.140] - Speaker 1
There's a concept, but the concept for me is emotional. So when I was a kid growing up in church, we really sang. It was huge. Music was a bigger part than the sermons were. I remember my childhood was both the just grittiest tent revival and real high church, not like Episcopal, high church, not to dump on Episcopalians. But we were informal, but we had stained glass windows in the church and an organ. When we would be singing Bach and Beethoven and Handel, and the organ would be as loud as it could go, and the bass was just roaring, and you could feel it in your chest. Everybody in the church is standing up singing Joyful, Joyful, We Adore thee, which is Beethoven's melody. Man, and I would go, This is the feeling I want in this movie, for example. I'm always trying to get to thatExtatic. Exactly the word. That's the word. Ecstasy. You want to be singing well, but your voice is blended with so many others. It's not your voice. It's not about you. That was union with God to me. And that's the feeling that I'm looking for in a movie when I've had moments when I was praying and I realized in the prayer that I had not written the words, that the prayer that was in me was the deepest part of my soul expressing itself.

[01:22:35.760] - Speaker 1
But it became a very simple... It was a question, but not asking for something. What do you want me to do as a father? And air came into me. In Genesis 1: 1, the whole like when God breathes into... It's spirit and breath are the same word. And the And that happened to me without me thinking about it. I hadn't thought of that concept in 30 years, but I had a... God had breathed into me. It's one of the scariest and most ecstatic I never did heroine, but when I've heard the descriptions of it, people say, well, you do it, you understand why people throw their lives away to get that again, and they can never get that again? This is an outer body. This is bigger than me. It's a divine experience.

[01:23:35.400] - Speaker 2
Was it scary?

[01:23:37.040] - Speaker 1
In a way, it was scary, and in a way, it wasn't. It was like I've become fascinated with angels, the concept of angels. And the first thing they say is, Don't be afraid. And that implies to me that meeting them is frightening. Your first experiences. And I've had those moments And this maybe four times in my life when I felt like I was in the presence of something divine. Now, it's not unlike holding your baby for the first time or for the thousandth time and smelling their breath and feeling their warmth. And I feel then I'm in the presence of the divine. When I'm feeling real love, that is divinity to me. But this is like something has connected me to the power of God. And you better take that really seriously. It's like, I want this, but I don't feel like I can stay in this moment. It's a mystery.

[01:24:49.600] - Speaker 2
Do you remember the four times? Oh, yeah. Tell me.

[01:24:53.420] - Speaker 1
Okay. First time was, I was about a year into divorce. And I thought it was just the most devastating personal failure. I'd had other experiences. When I was 11 years old, my father had a nervous breakdown, and my father was the best man I ever knew. So he always smelt like Old Spice. Always had a crisp shirt on a Botany 500 suit. His Oldsmobile was perfect. And he knew the names of the guys that swept up the floors as well as the name of the President. He was that guy, and he loved everybody. And he had a nervous breakdown, and that was terrifying.

[01:25:41.300] - Speaker 2
Do you know why he had a nervous breakdown?

[01:25:43.440] - Speaker 1
Yeah. At least my narrative of it. His father had died before he was born, and his mother was a widow, I think before she even knew she was going to be a mother. Wow. Yeah. That's wild. Yes. My father was born like Eight months and a week after his father died. His father got typhoid fever. The medical practice of the time killed him. They gave him Ipacac to make him vomit, and he got so dehydrated They had to stop. And he began to improve. And they said, he's improved enough to resume the treatment. And they killed him, which says to me a lot about what we think we know in any field. I don't care of science, religion, or anything. So my father grew up very much on his own. And in the Depression, started working full-time when he was 14. And he was so good at being a salesman because he could just connect with anybody. If we had my father here today, they could send him to Osama bin Laden, and they would call up and say, We're sorry. We're done. Okay, it's fine. Just send Thurman over. We're all good. I mean, he was really amazing, and his confidence was just impeccable.

[01:27:03.280] - Speaker 1
But he worked for a company called Curtis Candy Company, which was a... They made Baby Ruths and Butterfingers. And he just rose and rose and rose in that. And then the company got sold to some flippers, Harvard Business School guys that, okay, well, we'll increase the profitability by firing all the old guys. My father was 38. He was making more money than most Just everybody else was because he was a great salesman. Well, we'll replace him with a salary guy. Well, blah, blah, blah. And he had never been fired from anything. And it just destroyed him. I was with him, actually. The last sale he made for Curtis in 1961 was for $90,000, which was a tractor, trailer, truckload of candy. The next sale he made was for $0. 90. But he ended up rebuilding and becoming extremely successful.

[01:27:59.840] - Speaker 2
He How old were you at that time?

[01:28:01.110] - Speaker 1
Eleven. But I didn't have the personal guilt about... My guilt then was, I need to be the man of the family. I tried to analyze this in light of my recent experience was feeling the responsibilities like my friend Buddy that said to me, a relationship is two people. You can't take 100% of the responsibility. But I did. And my marriage had fallen falling apart. I would wake up every morning and pray to just get through the day without coming apart. At the end of the day, I always got through the day, and I would think, well, I actually got to have faith today and courage, and I wouldn't have had to have it if it weren't for these challenges to that. So I was going through that, and I was at a gathering of guys that were discussing a book, and I was talking with the guy who had written the book, quoted braveheart seven times. But he said in the book, William Wallace said this and William Wallace said that. So I went up to him afterwards and said, Hey, dude, I'm really flattered that you quote, but William Wallace never said any of that.

[01:29:15.780] - Speaker 1
But you never mentioned me. I pointed it out to him. But he had given me some fabulous advice in that time. I said to him that in his book, he asserted that it's a man's duty to rescue the woman if she is depressed or whatever else she is, that it's a man's duty to rescue her. And I had said to him, Well, I'm divorced. And what I took from your book was that I was even more condemnation of my failure because I should have... And he stopped and said, If you took that, I'm really sorry because if If you look in the Bible, King David is the greatest warrior in the Bible. But there are passages where David is hiding. He's maneuvering. He's making alliances. A soldier only knows to attack, but a warrior knows some hills can't be taken by frontal assault, and you have to- So you're saying King David was more like Rick Flair?

[01:30:22.560] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[01:30:24.980] - Speaker 1
Nobody was like Rick Flair. David was good, but he was no Rick Flair.

[01:30:35.800] - Speaker 2
Oh, man. Okay, so you're telling me the four, the four experiences.

[01:30:42.640] - Speaker 1
Yeah. So that night He had said in his lecture, If you want to do something scary, go home, get on your knees, and ask God to tell you what he thinks of you, and then listen. I had never heard anybody suggest something like that. I've never thought of God as the Oracle of Delphi, but I thought I would do it. I went home and I got down on my knees by myself and I thought, Well, before I ask God that question, I'll warm up and say, What do you want me to do about Andrew, who is my oldest son, and he was about to go off to college. And immediately I got an answer. Rick, the answer, it's not that I heard it with my ears, but it was crystal clear, trust him. And it was so clear and powerful, I started to argue with it. Really, it's ridiculous.

[01:31:44.220] - Speaker 2
That's really funny.

[01:31:45.660] - Speaker 1
I'm sitting there on my knees going, What do you mean trust him? Nobody trusts his son.

[01:31:54.100] - Speaker 2
That's so funny.

[01:31:54.780] - Speaker 1
And it's like, Nobody has a more trustworthy son, and I trust him more than anybody. I don't know, What do you I mean, try. And then I thought, Well, I sure am arguing, so I better pause for a moment. And then I thought, I don't trust him because everything I say to him is he's getting ready to go off to college. Is, Now, remember, now watch out for her. Now, be really good if you... And all those questions are saying to my son, I don't think you're ready. And what I need to say to him now is, I trust you, you got it. And then said, what about Colin, who was about 12? I was like, include him. Include him? What do you mean include him? And all of these things that have been going on is like, He's the baby of the family. We don't need to sit down and explain to him. Like, oh, yeah, we do. He knows more what's going on than anybody. So then I go, Well, what do you think of me? And I get, I love you. And I bawled like a baby. Wow. Then I was sitting there and like, That's what God is telling me.

[01:33:05.540] - Speaker 1
Then it was like, so God has come, but he hasn't told me what he wants me to do. I was telling a friend who's in Opus Dei, like the ultra Catholic, and he's Italian. So as I'm describing, I'm thinking, and he's nodding his head. I'm thinking, is he nodding because he understands the English? Because English isn't his first language. Or just like, he's just nodding in sympathy or he's nodding because he understands the experience. And so I said, well, I really feel like God was telling me he's got something for me to do, but he hasn't told me what it is that he wants me to do. And this guy goes, oh, he will. He was way down the line with having experiences like that himself.

[01:33:56.600] - Speaker 2
How old were you at the time of this story?

[01:33:59.380] - Speaker 1
Probably 52.

[01:34:01.400] - Speaker 2
Okay, here's what's interesting to me. You're 52. You were raised in a religious family. You went to seminary. Yes. Your whole life, you were taught that God loves you, that God is love. And at 52, when God tells you he loves you, it makes you cry and you can't believe it. It's interesting because it's It's not divergent from anything you've heard your whole life. There's no surprise in that message.

[01:34:38.100] - Speaker 1
And I had never thought of that. And as you say that, I wonder... I I wonder about the dynamic there. What is it that along with being told that you're loved, somebody can be saying, I love you, I love you, just like I could be saying to my son, I trust you, I trust you, but the very way I'm doing it is that I don't. But what I'm really, as a parent, is I'm afraid. So I want you afraid. Be careful. Those people out there are people out there that want to hurt you. And there are. I took my middle son, Colin, to Scotland right before he went off to college. And we wore kilts and ran around the Highlands with a bunch of the battle reenactors from Braveheart, many of whom are criminals. I mean, like open criminals. And one of the things I wanted to say is, Colin, there are people who will want to knock your teeth out because you have teeth. These guys, that's exactly... Now we're with them and they would fight for us. But that's how they look. That's how they smell. That's how they talk. That's how they walk.

[01:35:53.220] - Speaker 1
And they taught him a lot of lessons in that trip. But is the spirit that you're getting, the spirit of love, the spirit of faith, or the spirit of fear, or the spirit of distrust, which I suppose is a fear, or maybe it's intelligent to have it. I don't know. But it is right. It's like I'd been told, and I certainly had the experience of being loved. But I think I didn't love myself was a big part of it. I felt torn apart in divorce, actually, because I felt that there was a part of me that went, Randy, you love your family. You just don't know how to fix this. You even love your wife. You love everybody involved. You don't know how to... Is it better-Do you feel guilty? Oh, yeah. I felt inadequate. I felt like I just couldn't find a way to fix it. And that if I I was going to die. Wow.

[01:37:02.010] - Speaker 2
I mean, that's what I thought. It's heavy. Yeah. It's heavy.

[01:37:04.780] - Speaker 1
And I even had those kinds of thoughts of, I'm not doing any good to anybody if I die. This won't help Yeah. Anybody, no matter who's mad or who's hurt or who's like, if I'm not here, that's not good. So it was dark. It was a dark time. And being reminded that just as I loved my sons. I was saying those prayers because I loved my sons. Then I was in that mode. And the next time was I was having a movie come out. And every time I have a movie come out, There's this enormous fear that I'm going to be crushed by whatever happens, good or bad. That's interesting. That if it's a huge hit, then I can spiral into the wrong thing. I've never I've been afraid of drugs or wild women. I have a certain fascination with certain things, but I've never had that as a feeling of liability that I was going I didn't even taste alcohol until I was in my mid-20s. But a huge success that then makes everyone say, okay, that's what you do. Do that for the rest of your life, would be artistic death for me.

[01:38:30.000] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[01:38:30.800] - Speaker 1
And at the same time, the fear that, well, if everybody hates it, then...

[01:38:36.080] - Speaker 2
You might not get to do it again.

[01:38:37.200] - Speaker 1
You may not get to do it again. And then how will I feel about myself and all those things. So I say this prayer of, help me not make God out of what other people think. Beautiful. And that's a good one. That's my prayer. You please help me remember.

[01:38:55.930] - Speaker 2
How did you get to that?

[01:38:58.020] - Speaker 1
Growing up in a real evangelical background, the Ten Commandments were big. And the very first one is, you have no other gods before me and love your neighbor as yourself. Jesus said that. Those are the two, really, that you focus on. Down through the years, in all the various ways that I've looked into other people's understanding of God, even like friends of mine who are AA people, they go, Well, one of the first things they tell you is there is a God, it's not you. And the surrender to that Seemed crucial. But the perversion of that. I thought when I first moved to California, that you could tell a lot about a place by who God is there. And my sense was in Los Angeles, celebrity is God. It doesn't matter what you did to get your money or your Fame. But if you're famous, then everybody's fascinated by you. In New York, it's money. You might have done some horrific things, but you got a pile of money, then you're the center of attention. The South, it's more like pride and honor, which isn't better. I mean, it's not better, but it's just different.

[01:40:13.620] - Speaker 1
But you make those things God instead of recognizing that there's a transcendence and accepting that I don't have all the answers gives me the humility to go, this other person is worth listening to and loving. So Secretariat was about to come out. And the night before I got down on my knees, it was a bizarre story. I just got out of the shower and I was just getting ready to get in bed, but I was naked. But I got down on my knees and it was odd to be praying naked. But I was living in a place that nobody could see my balcony, and it looked out over the ocean. And I walked out and thought, I'm going to pray outside. And instead of lowering my head, I'm going to look up at the stars. And I walked out and I spread my arms and I started to say the prayer. And suddenly it just went, there it was again. And then I went, This is God telling me, not in a bigger than a specific, bigger than go to Memphis and get this street corner. It wasn't that. It was a bigger thing that words couldn't even hold.

[01:41:32.640] - Speaker 1
And that was God. And as soon as that thought went, then it happened again. Twice in the same like... And then it happened again recently. I have a window, stained glass, that I had made after I had the adventure with my hand. The doctor was going to amputate my right-hand. And I got to keep my hand. And involved in that whole thing was a dream. I'd gone to sleep thinking they were going to cut my hand off the next morning. I had this dream of the Wallace family crest, which is a hand holding a sword, cocked to strike a night. Under it is pro libertate, which is Latin for freedom. But in my dream, I dreamed I was the night. Instead of holding a sword, it was a finger pointed toward heaven. And that was where they were going to begin. It was that finger they were going to start cutting off. And I woke up and went, God's not going to take my hand. And they rolled me in the next morning and put me under. And when I came out, my sons were grinning. Look, just like you do right now, my sons were smiling.

[01:42:49.440] - Speaker 1
And my hand was still there. And so I decided, well, I'm going to... I went and bought a Bozendorfer piano. So I'm going to play piano every day. Instead of squeezing a rubber I'm going to get some of that. I can just dig in and just play Beethoven and do those. So every day I play, but I had this stained glass window made. And in the middle is the Keltic cross that's over my parents' grave. I try to pray for gratitude because there's all that thing that you go, Well, please watch over my sons. Please watch over this person. Please help this person heal or me. But I I don't want that to be my last thought of the day. I want my last thought of the day to be, Thank you for all of the great things. In the morning, I'll pray for what? Here's what I hope and help me find my way, what I can do to help these things happen. There's a church in Rome that was a pagan temple. When they converted to Christianity, they adapted some of their culture, and they didn't pray hunched over with their hands together.

[01:44:00.240] - Speaker 1
They prayed with their arms open, out wide. And I'd begun to pray that way and found that I felt more vulnerable and more open.

[01:44:08.800] - Speaker 2
It's very beautiful. Yeah. A beautiful idea.

[01:44:12.140] - Speaker 1
And so I was on my knees, but like that.

[01:44:16.220] - Speaker 2
Hands-wide.

[01:44:17.070] - Speaker 1
Hands-wide.

[01:44:17.740] - Speaker 2
Beautiful.

[01:44:18.620] - Speaker 1
And I had a vision of this terrifying being. I was in heaven on my knees in front of the throne of God, but this being was between me. I couldn't see beyond him. And he was surrounded by warrior angels. And this guy felt like he was the king of the warrior angels. And he looked at me. I know this sounds like it.

[01:44:44.830] - Speaker 2
That was wild.

[01:44:45.600] - Speaker 1
Probably. I've never done mushrooms. No way. I've never done. Sounds psychedelic. Psychedelic. But it really was like there was so much sober clarity to it. There's no intoxication feeling of this. And he looked at me and he did a motion with his hand and this thing shot out like a bolt of plasma lightning, about a foot long, it felt like. I didn't see this with my eyes. I saw this between my ears, but that thing hit me and I felt it hit me. I physically felt it hit me in the chest, this thing. I know this sounds like wild ranting. I'm from Tennessee, okay? I go to Cracker Barrel. It's my favorite place.

[01:45:33.740] - Speaker 2
What do you think that was about?

[01:45:35.880] - Speaker 1
I think it was being told two things. It was you have a mission and you got to do it. But again, not what it's going to be, but there was an identity piece of it. You have been nighted by the angels. That's the most As that comes out of my mouth, I haven't said this to anybody. It sounds like the most grandiose head up my butt thing that a person could say, but it felt like that.

[01:46:11.300] - Speaker 2
That was the experience.

[01:46:12.260] - Speaker 1
That was the experience. And I honestly do feel that everybody has that. That bolt of life that we are given, and it's our mission. Our mission isn't limited by go to the mailbox and drop in a quarter or something. It's a bigger thing like be alive, be fully alive.
