[00:00:03.040] - Speaker 
Tetragrammaton. Turn around. Turn around. Turn around.

[00:00:23.240] - Speaker 1
No, I I I we'll talk about it when we record. But like the show has made work in life the same thing in so many ways. How long have you.

[00:00:32.680] - Speaker 2
Been filming now.

[00:00:34.080] - Speaker 1
Now for 3 or 4 weeks. For this?

[00:00:39.440] - Speaker 2
No, but you started before that.

[00:00:41.000] - Speaker 1
Well, I started before that. And then I would film off and on in that break between like October and January, I would film some.

[00:00:50.720] - Speaker 2
But everything has been since the last special. Yeah, yeah. And from the time that you started it, it what I remember was, I'm just going to start filming stuff. But you didn't have a I don't remember you having a clear vision of an end of what it was going to be.

[00:01:07.040] - Speaker 1
No, no. Well, it's we're treating it episodically now, like, it's like just episodes of the show. Um, just thinking of it as, like a docu series, but, like, it kind of flows like life. Like nothing's on a rigid schedule. It's really funny how it's coming together, because it is like it is work, but it's not. It's so personal now that, like, it's stuff I should do to grow in life.

[00:01:40.040] - Speaker 2
In life. Yeah.

[00:01:41.600] - Speaker 1
And I'm doing it. I was thinking about this the other day. How much like it resembles, like when I did the multicam sitcom. The thing that's hard about sitcoms. Like, they can be funny, but, like, the character has to grow in some way by the end of the episode. And like I was a comedian that, you know, was not about growth at all. I wouldn't have said that. Like it was like I would have rebelled against, like, I have no message. There's no growth. So even as a young man making that show, it's like, and where did you learn, Jerrod? I'm like, why I got to learn something? I don't want to learn. I just wanted to, like, you know, have it play out. But now I'm ready to learn stuff. And I know that, like, the importance of it. So it's actually easier in many ways than writing the show, like, than trying to find something. It's hard because it's something that I don't want to do or something I'm afraid of or like it's facing something, but it's easier, like it writes itself in a more natural way, you know, because it's like, oh, oh, I have learned something.

[00:02:52.000] - Speaker 1
This is what I learned, and it finds a pocket I never could have written I'm just starting, so I don't want to, like, speak too soon because some of it may not be interesting growth. Some of it may be hitting a wall. And so would you.

[00:03:03.200] - Speaker 2
Say it's a real reality show? Like like there's never been a real reality show.

[00:03:09.440] - Speaker 1
Exactly how how I thought of it. I was like, oh, what if I made a real.

[00:03:15.160] - Speaker 2
Like a reality show that wasn't a fake.

[00:03:17.080] - Speaker 1
Show? Yes, yes, that was a real reality show. It is like and it's at times aware of itself, but not so much that it's distracting. You know, it's like aware of it as much as one would be aware, like, okay, the cameras are here.

[00:03:31.000] - Speaker 2
Yeah. But like when you have the cameras around enough, you start.

[00:03:34.920] - Speaker 1
The awareness dissipates and it's no longer like, look at that and not performing for it anymore because you would just be exhausted, like just hours and hours and hours of filming, like you, you.

[00:03:47.360] - Speaker 2
You you got you eventually let your guard down.

[00:03:49.960] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[00:03:50.560] - Speaker 2
When you, when you're doing, uh, comedy when you get up or doing a proper comedy show. And whether you're just there with the audience or whether it's being filmed. Is it different? Like if you know you're filming it, does it change?

[00:04:07.560] - Speaker 1
So filming does like on stage does heighten it, but in a way that I love. Like it's like, okay, get this. Like it's it's kind of, I mean, talking to you, you know, this, that space where like complete focus and letting go meet and it's like like I trust it more because I know the camera captures the truth even if I'm trying to hide it. So I might as well not hide it. So it incentivizes me to be honest and incentivizes me to to like, want to go somewhere. I want to give a show. I'm on stage and I want to perform, and I want it to be good. And you know, if it's being recorded, I would like not to go back to get another take. I don't consider it that way. I want to get it right now. Right. And there's a combination of those things that when I get that right, it just it's just a much better show. It's just much better. Um.

[00:05:09.880] - Speaker 2
So you'd say, would you say that the pressure of filming it heightens the experience for you in a good way? Or is it not that there's pressure, it's something else.

[00:05:21.920] - Speaker 1
A friend asked me earlier today if I feel pressure and and and there is pressure to, uh, do good creatively. Like, you know, like. And I know I have to be honest and and I know the preparation it takes. So I like, you know, I prepare for every show now more than I have before. Um, and I it's a lot of preparation. Preparation. And preparation. And then just like. Like like not having my phone around. Like not no small talk, no nothing. I walk from my door to the stage. If I'm in New York and I'm doing City Winery, I literally just with headphones, Dave Brubeck walking in there and like let go. And so having the cameras there, it's just like it confirms what I already know that like, you know, it's just another experience, but it's a more permanent experience. Someone else in the audience who is taking like really taking all this in, recording it. And so I want to do well for that, you know, um, which is what I should be feeling anyway.

[00:06:37.480] - Speaker 1
And I do, but like, the cameras, just.

[00:06:40.360] - Speaker 2
What's an interesting thing, as you say it, what I'm thinking about is when you do a show in front of an audience, it's public. So people have the experience and it's that moment when you film it, two things happen. One, more people can see it, but also you can watch it over and over again, which you can't do if you don't film it. So there's the repeat the repeat aspect of it. And that's very different. That's a very different.

[00:07:08.560] - Speaker 1
It's very different. It's very different. And it makes me both called them like like they almost feel like these unique improvised jazz performances like, oh, you came here tonight. You'll never see this performance again. And like, that's how my shows have been going. So capturing it. It makes me want to do that more. It makes me want to like, craft some unique experience that I haven't recorded before, that I can record right now that I can't do again, you know, and it's yeah, yeah, I.

[00:07:44.120] - Speaker 2
Suppose in some ways also Once it's on film, it's. It becomes obsolete.

[00:07:51.720] - Speaker 1
It's over. It's over.

[00:07:53.800] - Speaker 2
And and you don't say those things anymore because you've said those.

[00:07:57.520] - Speaker 1
I've said those. I've recorded those.

[00:07:59.360] - Speaker 2
Whereas if you don't film it, you might do a similar set another night. You might, you know, like work towards perfecting the material over weeks, months, years. Yeah. Yeah. Until you film it and then when you film it, that like it's stamped. Yes. And then it gets taken out. And now we're back to a clean slate.

[00:08:21.920] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Yeah. Now, because it's been so personal. It. I'm filming where I'm at right now in my life. It's a snapshot of right now. Sometimes I'm, like, talking about something very immediate. Sometimes it's figuring out a person from my past. An past, an event from my past. But because it's so personal, like it's like any it's like a conversation about it or like a therapy session about it, or like it's just exploring it from whatever angle, whatever is happening in that moment. Stories. Um, and then that's it, you know, that's it. And yeah, if it's recorded, then we recorded that. And but even if I talked about it again, it would just be different. Like talking about my dad. You know, I just went on this road trip with my dad, and I haven't done stand up about it yet, but I could do ten completely different sets about that road trip. Like, you know, like completely different thoughts or ways in like, like, like I'm trying to figure out what it is.

[00:09:41.920] - Speaker 1
So I would be working it out on stage, you know?

[00:09:44.600] - Speaker 2
So if you didn't do those ten sets to get that material out in the very near future, would it just evaporate?

[00:09:52.400] - Speaker 1
It would evaporate, but it would change and it I can it's it's at its best when there's something urgent, when there's something pressing either something that I've like a revelation I've had or something that could lead me to a revelation on stage or a question that I can explore. But there has to be urgency to it. Um, so what would happen is like, you know, in like, it's taken me like a week. It hasn't been a full week yet, but it's taken me some days to I've had realizations today about, you know, last week and that it'll grow and I'll start capturing those right in these things down. And then, you know, I'll do some sets A month from now. It's something else. It's what I've taken from it at that point. Maybe I have a burning question. Or maybe there's something else that I'm trying to figure out about it, but it may not be as urgent. It may not be like, you know, maybe it will, maybe it won't.

[00:10:58.680] - Speaker 1
I don't know, but I can only follow those things. Which are.

[00:11:02.360] - Speaker 2
Yeah. When did the idea of honesty become such a hallmark of what you're doing?

[00:11:14.360] - Speaker 1
It was like such a wild thing to conceive. It was like exposing. At least, is how I felt like it was exposing all of my life up until that point, as at least somewhat of a lie. And I felt like somewhat of a liar retrospectively. Um, and because that was so big and so scary doing that. It's almost like a drug now. It's like, okay, can I just be can I just be honest? Can I expand that into my work? Can I expand that to my relationship? Can I expand that into everything? Um, how can I make work out of it? It's just because it's a personal obsession, which I still fall short of in the smallest ways, and sometimes in bigger, more consequential ways. Keeping stuff from people important to me, keeping myself from people important to me. Uh, you know, it makes the work interesting, but but they are married now, like, because it's like, if I'm talking about my life on stage, then I'm talking about my life on stage.

[00:12:37.920] - Speaker 1
For real? Um. Um. And I don't know, I'm just. I'm curious to see how how long I can keep it up. Like, I don't know, like the. I keep finding new consequences, if that makes sense. Like, I keep finding new. Like it. It doesn't feel easy yet.

[00:13:00.560] - Speaker 2
Only consequences or consequences and prizes like consequences.

[00:13:04.480] - Speaker 1
Both. Both. But the consequences is what makes it. If it were consequence free, I don't know if I would be applying it to my work, you know, because like, it wouldn't, it wouldn't be as interesting.

[00:13:18.120] - Speaker 2
Okay, so as it relates to consequences, let's talk about the Golden Globes. Okay. Tell me your experience of that, of that night.

[00:13:26.360] - Speaker 1
Um, that night was I didn't know exactly what I was going to say. Um, until. Like, truly 15 minutes before, like going out there.

[00:13:39.400] - Speaker 2
Did you have something else you could have done? Like, did you have something else up until that moment? Was there a different plan?

[00:13:46.040] - Speaker 1
I just couldn't settle on one. I didn't know what it needed from me like. And I said yes. I felt compelled to say yes.

[00:13:57.200] - Speaker 2
How far in advance did you say yes?

[00:13:59.080] - Speaker 1
This is maybe four weeks.

[00:14:01.000] - Speaker 2
So not so.

[00:14:01.640] - Speaker 1
Long. Not so long, not so long. And, um, I said yes. I wanted to do it, I get excited, it's, uh. It's interesting because I feel as though I could be a good host, and I resent that because I don't know, to me, my definition of host is sacrificing yourself for, uh, you know, the show and.

[00:14:31.040] - Speaker 2
Yeah, the host being the host is not about you. It's not It's not.

[00:14:34.090] - Speaker 1
About you.

[00:14:34.530] - Speaker 2
It's about.

[00:14:34.850] - Speaker 1
Them. And I only want to talk about me. I only want to explore like it's the thing I have authority over or the story I have authority over. It's the thing that, you know, I'm an expert sometimes that you know and I'm curious about. I want to talk about me. So hosting was hard because I know what the set traditionally requires. Like jokes. It's jokes, and I. I tell jokes sometimes. It it hasn't been how I describe my style recently. But like like, it's not a lot of jokes. I think I'm funny. I don't think I tell a lot of jokes, though. I told a lot of jokes and I can write a joke. And I wrote some jokes for the Globes, and I and I said a few jokes, post monologs sprinkled throughout. I said like some of the jokes that I thought were funny. I thought they were really funny. I thought they were kind of dangerous and funny and and, um, but the monolog, I didn't know how to talk.

[00:15:47.610] - Speaker 1
I don't know how to talk for five minutes. Not about me, I can I'm just not interested in that. Yeah. Like and I was it was a lot to figure out with the Globes. Like, why did I say yes? I kept trying to figure out why did I say yes?

[00:15:59.530] - Speaker 2
Yeah. And why did you say yes? Let's let's talk about.

[00:16:02.370] - Speaker 1
Because I like it. I do love award shows. I love show business. Yeah, I love the entertainment industry. I think it's really, really cool. And sometimes I sound pretentious and I sound like an asshole. And it's only because I love it so much. I think things should be good and can be good. I think things should be exciting. I love television, I love live television. I watch SNL every week because it's a live event where something could happen, something exciting could happen. It's a show that you have to get right in the moment. That's exciting to me. The me. The Golden Globes is alive just on SNL. I wanted to do this. I was like, oh, this is great because there's some danger in that. Like, what's going to happen? And I knew that, and I and I, you know, I knew I wasn't going to tell NBC my monolog. And I knew I kind of had the situation by the balls because they got in controversy over, like, some race shit.

[00:16:50.890] - Speaker 1
They got a black host because they kind of had to, which is, you know, and and here I am. You know.

[00:16:55.730] - Speaker 2
It's also different, though. The Golden Globes and SNL are really different because people are coming to SNL to laugh. Yes. People are coming to Golden Globes to hopefully win an award. And there there's anxiety. Everyone has anxiety. It's like, be like even like getting up in Las Vegas. Like the people in Las Vegas aren't there to see comedy. They're there to do to gamble. Yeah. And if you go to a comedy show, it's a weird vibe in the room.

[00:17:19.530] - Speaker 1
Some people lost, you know, they lost.

[00:17:21.490] - Speaker 2
Or if they're winning, they want to go back to the table.

[00:17:23.610] - Speaker 1
Exactly.

[00:17:24.130] - Speaker 2
They don't want to. They don't want to break it. Yeah. Yes.

[00:17:26.730] - Speaker 1
And the show had anxiety. The show itself had a nervousness to it.

[00:17:32.410] - Speaker 2
Because of the, the, uh, the fact that it was the controversy of the past.

[00:17:40.370] - Speaker 1
It had an organization, the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, that had no black members, that was found out, you know, and, uh, as they reorganized, they didn't air, uh, the previous year. And so they're back on a one year contract and I'm the host. Its one year contract. And, uh, I did feel an obligation to speak to that, and in many ways for the show and. Justify even the need for the show, like, because it's like you could argue, why is this even exist anymore? Um, but because I love showbiz and I, you know, have a deep appreciation for really talented people, even if it is like a silly organization. Then, you know, if people want to watch and you can award people for being talented that year and their field, then great. I think that's great. You know, and I think it got so mired in politics. And I just wanted to address why I was there and what I thought about it.

[00:18:51.690] - Speaker 1
And I felt like that was the marriage between my stand up where I'm at right now and the show. And I was like, okay, well, I'll talk about me and how I got here. Um, uh, it just felt like the right thing to do to me. It felt like the right thing to do, and I still wanted it to be funny. And I still think I personally, I think it's very funny. Like, I laugh at it. I laugh at like, um, uh, there was, you know, a couple jokes that the room was so tense they didn't really laugh, but I was like, all right, what can you do about that? Um, and you felt the anxiety of what is he going to say? Which is exciting to me because he's live. And like, I'm not just telling jokes and I'm not like Ricky Gervais should host, truly. He should host, like, like. And he'll probably be back next year. He should do it.

[00:19:48.330] - Speaker 1
You know, I think it is like the ribbing that they want. Like they, they want like, you know, jab us but whatever. But I was just being personal. I was, you know, talking about the president of the organization and, and NBC marketing and things that were very real, you know, um.

[00:20:08.290] - Speaker 2
What was the feeling in the room? What did it feel like being on stage?

[00:20:12.050] - Speaker 1
Well, first of all, I talked to production before the show. And don't get me wrong, I love Stephen Hill, who asked me to do it, but I asked production to Have the room quiet, just from a performance aspect, like I'm treating it like any other show. As far as I'm concerned, as a performer, like I want to go out and I want the room to be as quiet as you can like, because it's television again. And when the red light is on, shut up. Like, like focus should be for the camera. Like this is a force beyond all of us. Now that's how I view it. And I know it's the the boozy one and the fun one, but I'm like, we're on a one year contract. I actually want to do a good job, and I want to have like, you know, focus to do it. I go out, it's loud. So, you know, they cut it out of the YouTube clip. But like on the actual live one, it's the the first few seconds of just me asking the audience to settle.

[00:21:10.970] - Speaker 1
I'm just pacing back and forth and asking them to settle down and getting the focus down. And like, quiet really focuses everyone's attention. So everyone then got quiet And then I began, uh, but it was, uh, at that point then kind of a nervous energy, you know, like everyone's kind of quiet and leaned forward, and they want to laugh, and they're looking for a way to laugh or a reason to laugh. And, you know, a lot of people in that room aren't familiar with me, so they don't know, like, my sense of humor, and they're learning it in the moment. Um, and, uh, yeah, it felt a little tense. It felt a little tense.

[00:21:50.850] - Speaker 2
Was it after the monolog, what was your immediate feeling? Right when the monolog ends?

[00:21:57.490] - Speaker 1
Good. I felt like I said what I wanted to say.

[00:22:01.050] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[00:22:02.090] - Speaker 1
I was like, yeah, this is. That's what I wanted to say. Kind of how I wanted to say it. I didn't want to smile and I didn't smile, you know? And I told jokes, you know, for the rest of the night. And I was ready to do that. But the The monolog felt good. It felt like me. I think if I can recognize myself, I feel okay about it. Yeah, if I know that I went out there and it was me. And I was like, cool. I felt pretty cool.

[00:22:38.170] - Speaker 2
In earlier when you were talking about going on a trip with your father, just just now coming back. And now there's ten potential sets that could come from that. How much do you look back on things like you just did you just went on this trip? How much do you think about it after?

[00:23:01.410] - Speaker 1
A lot. A lot. My my friend Avery said I seem heavy, like, for the past couple of days. And it's because it is a lot to process. Just my father and his past and and, you know, I brought up things he didn't want to talk about. And, you know, I watched him really shut down, and I saw myself in him. Wow. And it's.

[00:23:30.690] - Speaker 2
That's heavy.

[00:23:31.530] - Speaker 1
Yeah, it's a lot. It's a lot. And I can see me. I can really see me. And I can see. Him trapped in there sometimes and I don't know. And. And I saw parts of myself that I didn't like. Like, why am I doing. Like, you question the whole thing. Why am I doing this? Why do I have cameras on my father? And I'm asking these personal questions and and I feel at times I question the necessity of that. And then I know I never would have asked him these things without them. And so then I get answers that even when he doesn't answer, the camera gets an answer. Camera always gets an gets an answer. And so I get answers and some of those answers, you know, call into question my whole childhood, you know. And it's like heavy and it's and it's like that's what I'm saying about like consequences. Like it doesn't feel good it going through that. I don't like it. I don't know how else to put it.

[00:24:43.010] - Speaker 2
Are you saying it's a difficult process? But you have to get through the process in order to get to the other side of it?

[00:24:49.850] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I'm hoping there's something to learn. And I know I have to keep digging deeper. And me and my father's relationship, just personally, with or without cameras, I still have to. There's stuff I have to figure out, and I. And I want to figure out why he's here. What do you.

[00:25:02.970] - Speaker 2
Think it is about you wanting the camera? You said you wouldn't ask the questions if the camera wasn't on.

[00:25:11.210] - Speaker 1
It makes me braver. Or somehow because it's it's on the record and it's like. There is something godlike about the camera, like, all right, you're in front of God. Say what you want to say. Like God sees all. You can only express purity in front of God, like in the presence of God, in a way not to sound dramatic about it, but it it's a lie detector test. It's a it's got a little bit, um, and I know that could be a sick way of looking at it, but I always view God as present. Yeah. And the camera just confirms how I felt. So it being there. Ask. You're in front of God now. What would you ask someone in front of God if God is present?

[00:26:06.530] - Speaker 2
Yeah. I wonder if you couched it. That's a really interesting idea. If you said to your dad, I know there's a camera here, but don't worry about that. Answer me as if God is present. God is present. Let's. Let's have a conversation before God.

[00:26:25.210] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Yeah.

[00:26:28.050] - Speaker 2
How does that change the anxiety level when you're having a conversation before God versus in front of a camera? I feel like in front of God I would relax more.

[00:26:38.610] - Speaker 1
For me, well, once I learned to trust God, I trust God. And and so I can. But it wasn't easy for me just to overcome the personal obstacles. Like the fears, the fear of perception. Or being perceived the wrong way. Because I was always afraid of being found out my whole life.

[00:27:03.690] - Speaker 2
So your whole life, starting when?

[00:27:06.610] - Speaker 1
As long as I can remember, I knew there were feelings I had toward Boys that were wrong. And I knew my father's secret, and that brought me a certain level of embarrassment for my family. And so I was always kind of hiding something, hiding little details about myself or hiding. Uh, actual, actual, uh, facts about my life. Just because I don't want to be found out. I was afraid of being caught. Um, but you.

[00:27:41.490] - Speaker 2
Were afraid of being caught by people or by God.

[00:27:44.530] - Speaker 1
All of it. All of it. I was afraid of being caught by people and God. I had a I don't I don't want to tell like too vulgar of a of a story or a trait. But like when I was a kid, like, you know, we always had a computer as my parents to get a computer. So we got an IBM and, um, right when I was like, you know, 12 or 13, I get home from middle school before my parents got home from work. So obviously as a kid, this perfect amount of time to, you know, jerk off and explore yourself and whatever, I'm doing, what all boys do. So, you know, I'm on the internet, but I, I always felt like God was in the room. He's always watching. So it made me put away. I would put away if there was like a Bible out of my mom left the Bible out. I had to put that out of the room. Or like any crosses or little things, I had to kind of turn around before doing it because God is looking at you.

[00:28:42.490] - Speaker 1
And even that was too much having these physical manifestations of God glaring at me, I just was too much. So I would put that away, but still feeling like God was watching and me being a little closeted gay boy on my gay websites. You know, I would watch gay porn first finish, and then I would go back and watch a straight porn video. Just to even it out. Like, I was like, well, like it wasn't that jerking off was wrong. To God, it was jerking off to gay porn that I thought was wrong to God. And maybe he would be okay with me or even proud of me for, like, jerking off to straight porn right after. So I was like, I would do both I would have to squeeze into before my mother got home for God, you know? So I always felt like I was watching. Um, and now my vision of God has changed. So I bring in cameras.

[00:29:44.690] - Speaker 2
What was, um. What was your relationship to going to church as a kid every Sunday?

[00:29:50.810] - Speaker 1
Um. Uh, my mom went every Sunday. She was off work. And even if she was working, I went with my grandma Sunday school early was supposed to get there at 915. We're always a little late. Just if there's time, stop by Bojangles and get a sausage biscuit and sit in church. And I sang on the choir. Um, I led songs. Um, I have a great voice. Um, I found fun in arguing in Sunday school. I started having a slightly different view of God than my teachers at a pretty young age, so it was fun. On Wednesday night, prayer meeting to like, go and argue and have discussions and and, um, they found me funny. So it was a big social, uh, thing to I had fun at church.

[00:30:45.930] - Speaker 2
So you looked forward to going. It wasn't like you went under duress.

[00:30:49.250] - Speaker 1
Yeah, yeah. I mean, don't get me wrong, there were plenty of times where I would have rather stayed at home playing video games or, you know, football in the streets or wrestling in the backyard with my friends. But my mom insisted, and my mom even insisted that, uh, if we wanted to come in the house, like she would read the Bible to us, like me and all my friends. So it was just me and a bunch of smelly boys just sitting in the den while my mom read Psalm 91 to us so much that I memorized it. Like I could, uh, quote certain Bible verses back very easily. And we would go on Wednesday nights. Playing would be disrupted by her call to get in the car, go to church, um, 7:00 prayer meeting. Uh, and the kids would go downstairs and sometimes I would go upstairs and argue with the adults, you know, and once I was there, it was fun. I had fun, even, you know, being bored.

[00:31:47.810] - Speaker 1
And I like to sing. So even singing hymns was kind of fun to me. Um, and, uh, you know, those discussions, those arguments were always a reason to go. I found a reason to go and to like it. And I was active and I wanted to do more at church. I even joined like the youth missionaries, and I wanted to do certain like outreach things and have productions and things that would keep kids interested. And, you know, I was a kid myself, but I just wanted to do things that my very conservative minister shunned and shut down. And so I felt really stifled by the church, even in the perspective. It started feeling really narrow. And I still believed in God, and I just believed in a more dynamic God. And I believed in miracles. Like I was like, okay, well, the Bible talks about miracles. I know you have to be open to receiving it. So, all right. If people can walk on water and there can be fishes and loaves, then you know, I found little miracles in my own life when I was in tune.

[00:32:58.850] - Speaker 1
I still do, and I am religious in that way. I do seek God, and I try to find God because I know I'm at my best when I have him. And my version of him is more interior than it was in my childhood. But it's still very. I can't shake him. And so I stopped fighting. And I accept God in a way that's not how my mother views God or how the church I grew up in views God.

[00:33:28.090] - Speaker 2
But not not a wrathful God.

[00:33:32.290] - Speaker 1
Not a wrathful God, not an exterior God. Not not a man in the sky. Just a very personal God, a personal Jesus.

[00:33:41.770] - Speaker 2
How much do you think your life in church impacted who you are today?

[00:33:49.770] - Speaker 1
Oh, in so many ways. Even aside from religion, just the the performance the church teaches you a lot about performance one how to get people excited. How to keep people's attention. Um, there's a lot of danger in church. There's a lot of, um, you know, there's ways to be provocative, you know, when arguing, even just like being in a southern black Baptist church and going up and talking about, uh, Malcolm X and, like, talking about the, like, even in an environment like that, it's like, seen as radical or like finding ways to say curse words or like, like it's just like it affected me as a performer. My father, uh, teaching me how to, um, uh, act like I was feeling the spirit when leading a song and jumping up and down and, like, how people got excited and taking the mick out of the stand and walking up and down the aisles like. Like I would walk into the court, almost popped.

[00:34:50.730] - Speaker 1
And like, sometimes the the bottom would separate and I would just be singing like acapella, like. Yeah, Or singing without a mic. Because, you know I've gone beyond the limit. Yeah. My, my church got a wireless mic because of me. I was responsible for them getting a wireless microphone. Um, it's like the Cape routine.

[00:35:08.490] - Speaker 2
Like James Brown's cape routine.

[00:35:09.810] - Speaker 1
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Not Maceo, what's my man's name? He comes and puts the cape, and I can't. I can't do it no more.

[00:35:15.050] - Speaker 2
But like Jimmy Leonard, something like. Is that Joey?

[00:35:17.970] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I can't remember what his.

[00:35:19.810] - Speaker 2
I can't remember his.

[00:35:20.530] - Speaker 1
Name, but but exactly. Exactly like my dad being from the era of performance really instill a lot of those things in me. And yeah, you learn a lot. You learn the minister, you know, and and you can't call it a performance. That's always interesting too, because my mom would say stuff like, oh, I thought you were feeling the spirit. And I'm like, I was 11. Like, really? Like, you know, but but it just meant I was good at it. And ministers perform and you have to, uh, put emphasis on certain things and sometimes say things that maybe you question, but you have to sell it, and you have to find emotion in things and find the best find emotion in their delivery. And I do believe that they believe what they're saying and they find a pocket. My Uncle William was such a good orator. I would go to church, to his church just to hear him speak. Um, and passion is important to, you know, to not have people yawning and just asleep in their seat.

[00:36:21.530] - Speaker 1
You know, perspective is important. So like, it's it's an interesting show. I like church because it's a very interesting show. Um, I needed I was talking about those Sunday services that we went to. I missed those, we went.

[00:36:36.050] - Speaker 2
Incredible.

[00:36:37.370] - Speaker 1
Basically every Sunday for a year. Yeah. And and because the music was the best part. So like, it was like my favorite part of church for like an hour, an hour and a half of my favorite part. Outside, outside, even inside, in the dome in the room was so great, like the sound and bringing, you know, a horn section in and drums in, and then sometimes you'd sing amid the choir, and sometimes they were in a circle in the middle, and sometimes we were on a mountaintop, and sometimes we were in a field, and it was just the greatest thing ever. And I got to send yay songs from my childhood like, you know, how excellent was like a song we sang in church, and now they're doing it in this magical place. And I brought my mom to Coachella, you know, to hear it. It was it was it was amazing. It was amazing. I cried in church for the first time in years at those Sunday services.

[00:37:37.330] - Speaker 1
That was very, very religious. It was a very truly religious experience.

[00:37:45.410] - Speaker 2
It was for him, too. It was it was everything so important.

[00:37:49.530] - Speaker 1
For.

[00:37:51.730] - Speaker 2
Anytime you get up. Do you record the set?

[00:37:53.970] - Speaker 1
Yes. Now.

[00:37:55.250] - Speaker 2
And do you listen back or not?

[00:37:58.330] - Speaker 1
Some sets, some sets I do. Some sets I send to a couple friends for thoughts. Um, I can listen back now. I couldn't before when I was more of a character on stage. I couldn't I couldn't stand to hear it. I realized that now before I thought I was being lazy or I thought I was being, uh, I thought it was just something I couldn't do. Go back and listen to myself. Oh, I don't do that. But it was because I recognized the falseness in a lot of it, and that's hard to hear. It's hard to watch. It's hard to hear.

[00:38:40.970] - Speaker 2
If you listen back. Now, are you ever surprised by what you hear?

[00:38:47.610] - Speaker 1
Yes, I'm surprised at what I say. Sometimes I'm surprised by stories I recall. Sometimes I tell a story for the first time on stage. I'm like, I've never said that to anyone before. And if I'm feeling really free, free with a with a focus, you know, it is this balance between there is work to get there, but I can let go if I, if if I've done the work, I can let go and I'll find stuff all the time. That's why the performances are unique, because I am having realizations on stage at my best or at my freest, I should say it is happening. Um. Yeah, yeah, it makes me laugh. Now if I laugh, it's true. I like it's not part of the act. I'm. I'll go. Oh, wow. That's funny. Yeah, like, I realize something might be kind of funny as I'm saying it.

[00:39:52.130] - Speaker 2
Um, how was the the preparation for Rothaniel different than the preparation for eight?

[00:40:03.210] - Speaker 1
Eight was more traditional. Eight was me on the road. I never did the road a lot because I always made specials for television, like, um, and in in many ways, I was always trying to give a unique performance, like each time and offer something. I always knew I wanted to offer something. And as a young comedian, I was trying to figure out what that was, and I thought it was my best jokes. And, uh, something changed in between tapings of eight because eight, the first set I did the show was a good show. It was some Riffing with the audience and some like very new moments. I had that even in my first special, like there was a completely different set between tapings of my first special. Um, I was freer in the second one. I know that it's a part of me that I should capture, you know, it's something that I. That I can do. So. So without me being a little free up there. It's not the best show.

[00:41:10.810] - Speaker 1
Um, but eight, I've done the traditional set. I remember my brother coming in saying, that was great. You're playing with house money now. I remember Bo coming upstairs and saying, uh, we basically got it. It was like, really? You got we got the special. And I felt like there was something else I wanted to give. Again. I'm young and I don't know how to do that. I'm trying to figure out how to do it, but I know we got to second special in an hour and I'm going to figure it out. And I was at the Masonic Temple in New York on 23rd Street. And I'm in this, this like room like this with this long table and a giant gold statue of George Washington. And at the end of the long table is a bottle of of maker's Mark that I brought upstairs for inspiration. And I've been drinking a little bit and then drinking a little bit more and just, you know, a call to Ari. And I was like, you know, like, man, you know, just trying to pour my heart out, trying to be vulnerable, just trying, just trying like, just like talking to Ari.

[00:42:32.850] - Speaker 1
Because I can always be true with him. And I can always, like, be my total self with him unapologetically. I can, I can, I can say the wrong things to him and I trust him with my life. And so I called him. And I'm like, by this point I'm already slurring and I'm and I've never been drunk before. I, I didn't like I didn't have my first drink until my mid 20s.

[00:43:00.490] - Speaker 2
And at this time, are you drinking to get drunk or are you just drinking?

[00:43:04.690] - Speaker 1
I'm drinking because I want to give more. And this will open me up a little bit. And and yes.

[00:43:11.850] - Speaker 2
You want to do something different than do.

[00:43:13.410] - Speaker 1
Something different and yes, to get drunk. But I had never been drunk before, so you.

[00:43:17.170] - Speaker 2
Don't know what you're.

[00:43:17.970] - Speaker 1
So. I don't really know what drunk is.

[00:43:19.770] - Speaker 2
You're moving into the unknown.

[00:43:21.530] - Speaker 1
I'm moving into the unknown. And I don't know how much I'm drinking. I don't.

[00:43:26.250] - Speaker 2
Yeah, if you're if you're not a regular drinker.

[00:43:29.130] - Speaker 1
I'm just.

[00:43:29.610] - Speaker 2
What does it mean?

[00:43:30.210] - Speaker 1
I'm just tossing them back. I'm just. I'm tossing them back, like. Like my my family has a high tolerance level. I've learned. And so it's I'm just doing shots of of of whiskey straight. Calling friends, trying to cry. Trying to pour something into the regular set. Not thinking like, like change the words like like change my intention. Change the words. These are things I've learned. Things I learned in time. But like I'm just thinking I want to pour my heart out. I want to give them everything. This taping I got, I got the words I give something beyond words, Gerard. That's what I'm telling myself. And by the time they came to get me to go downstairs, I don't know what hit me. I don't remember much. I just kind of I remember stepping foot on stage. We were in the round, so it's all a little weird and dreamy. Anyway, I'm in these long, weird hauls and I it's a weird route to the stage.

[00:44:42.940] - Speaker 1
And so I walk into this room and everyone's dressed up and they're in suits and it's like, you know, they're applauding for me. And I remember stepping on stage and I don't remember how I started the show. I don't remember. I don't remember the opening line. I don't know if that's the show that we got. Are we going to be? No, I think that was from the first one. We might have got the intro from the first one because that was part of the plan. But, uh, I don't remember much about that show. I was told that I started somewhere, maybe 20 minutes in, repeating jokes.

[00:45:21.820] - Speaker 2
From the same set.

[00:45:23.100] - Speaker 1
From from the same set. You said.

[00:45:24.700] - Speaker 2
Within the 20.

[00:45:25.460] - Speaker 1
Minutes, in the 20 minutes before I started kind of going back and repeating things, and then the first time it happened, you know, Bo loves to tell the story. He's like at the monitors and he's like, He's he catches it first. You know, by the second time it happens, he looks over. The execs from HBO and A24 were there, and they start looking at each other a little strange. Like, did he already say that? By the third time, everyone's like, okay, what the fuck? Everyone's like, what is happening? And I don't really know what's happening. I have like flashes from that set, but I remember feeling like I was on stage pleading, but I don't know about what. And I'm just saying things and saying things. And all of a sudden, I remember hearing Beau's voice from the voice of God, just like talking to me, basically saying, wrap it up. I'd been on stage for far longer than an hour and I'm like, just going.

[00:46:25.380] - Speaker 1
And it's getting weird. And Beau is calling me off stage. So at some point I finally just in the show I get, I wrap it up, I go and like collapse into the dressing room. And Beau loves to say that. He says to Bill Chase, an exec who's since retired at HBO. He says, hey, Bill, it was a pleasure working with you. And Bill just laughed. He went, huh? And walked out. And there was some article and some, uh, you know, guy wrote about it being the weirdest taping ever. And you would think I got so lucky because some of it you would think you'd have to throw it out. But I think we use maybe ten, 15 minutes of it, of that set just because it was oddly emotional. At least read like that on camera for a stretch. Some of it's just totally unusable. And me and Beau say that someday we're going to get drunk and watch it, but but, um, it was me trying.

[00:47:29.180] - Speaker 1
I was really trying. And then, um, I took time off, um, to to grow up. But I think I grew a lot in the time that I just stopped doing comedy. I would try and do a show here or there, a few, like eventful shows, sometimes like a charity event. I remember getting booed at the Greek theater at the start of the Me Too movement. Like doing like some Will Ferrell like charity show. Um, and you know, I'm doing sets sporadically. And then I just stopped and then Trump happened and Trump kind of killed comedy for me because just no one was funnier than him. And what was the point? And, and and he was the greatest current event comic. That's the other thing. Like Trump was the best at. And I'm not even saying that I had personal change because of that, but I'm saying that It coincided with this happening. So like, I felt no urge to go up. And I'm going to say something funnier about the world than the president.

[00:48:41.660] - Speaker 1
No, I it was impossible. So, uh, and with less consequence, I would say it with less consequence. So. But I came out to my friends at this time at the time and came out to my family and, uh, started doing free associative therapy, uh, reading a lot. I started reading more and started working in a different way than I had before writing in a way that I'd never written, like I was never really a writer. I don't think I became a writer during that time. Um, and, uh, tried to grow. Tried to become more open. Still trying. So I don't want to say like I nailed it, but trying. Just trying. And, uh. And then I had a reason to do stand up again. And then I had something to say. Um, and and a new way to say it, you know, because.

[00:49:56.060] - Speaker 2
Do you remember the first time you got back up after that, like, after the experience of you did eight? You take time off, you're reading, you're going inside. What's it like getting up for the first time? Were you already a different person than you were before?

[00:50:10.740] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Yeah, I felt I felt it and I was more I felt prepared to say things that I never said before. I felt energized to say it. And the first time I got up, I went to the Comedy Store And I had so much to say and and and I was it was like baby legs. I didn't know how to to to run with it yet. And. Um, I was in that room and I relied on old tricks. Trying to find the punchline. Not living in the moment. And sometimes it's not the space I've learned that to like, I've learned to just what spaces I can truly work in and what I can't. That works for me now. And, you know, sometimes, you know, I my ego would lead me to the clubs and I had to check that and check that intention. Um, and so, uh, I went up at the store and it was a little rough and, uh, but I was saying things I hadn't said before, but just in a way that resembled my old style.

[00:51:27.860] - Speaker 1
So, you know, that was a quick death because Bo came and watched me one night. Um, and he was like, man, you know, like, it's just a little. It was just a little rough. He was very honest with me. And, uh, and then one night, um, I remember we left dinner, uh, in the valley, and then I was like, I should go do a set. I just felt I felt that I wanted to do it. And I went by flappers, me and him, and, uh, and I had an idea of what I wanted to talk about. And Bo just was like. It was like a simple goal of, uh, just do something, say something that they'll remember. Just leave the audience with a memory. And I went on stage, and I. sat down and I talked about not wanting to go home for Christmas. I was afraid to go home. I'd just come out to my family. Didn't go great.

[00:52:38.860] - Speaker 1
A lot of shame. A lot of fear was keeping me away from home. It was a good boy that always went home for birthdays and Christmas and every holiday, especially once I could afford to. Um, and I wasn't. I wasn't going home for Christmas the first time I ever didn't go home for Christmas. And I talked about it. And after that set, bow was like, oh, we could film, like very soon. He was very, very soon. And after the first set at the store, he thought he was like, you're gonna have to just go on the road for a year and and figure this out. And then after that set it, something clicked. I. I wasn't afraid to live in the emotion on stage. And I was, uh, I was I had the patience for a story. I had the patience, and I had the the need to share it. And something clicked in that set. Um, and and then we that was in December of 2021, and then we filmed Rothaniel in February 2022.

[00:53:55.660] - Speaker 1
Wow. Yeah. So right after Valentine's Day, between Christmas and Valentine's Day.

[00:54:00.900] - Speaker 2
Amazing.

[00:54:01.660] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Yeah, it was like a really fast. I was there emotionally. I was ready for a change. Yeah. And then the technical part came once I was free enough to. Tell the truth.

[00:54:18.420] - Speaker 2
Yeah. It's amazing. Of your three specials. The growth and change between each of them is insane. It's like there are three different people.

[00:54:30.540] - Speaker 1
Yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah. No, I try to learn. I do want to learn one creatively. I always want to give something different and throw out the last thing. In some ways, even try to rebel against it. Like, okay, like, well, where was that wrong and where do I disagree with this? Um, but if I'm true to how I change as a person and I capture that, you know, it's lightning. But if you can capture that. Watching someone grow is interesting. Yeah. You know.

[00:55:07.140] - Speaker 2
It's a diary entry. It's a real moment in time. If the person is interesting and you happen to be. And I first, um, eight was the first thing that I saw of yours and it completely blew my mind because it was unlike any comedy stand up comedy special I'd ever seen before. And it's hard to do that because comedy. I mean, if you think of stand up comedy specials, it's a pretty narrow genre. Yeah. I mean, different clean jokes. Dirty jokes. Uh, yeah. Big stage, small stage.

[00:55:44.420] - Speaker 1
Yeah, yeah.

[00:55:46.140] - Speaker 2
But it's always. And now here he is. So and so and everybody applauds. And then the curtains open and the star comes out on stage and they tell the first joke. Yeah. And that didn't happen right from the beginning. Right from the opening. It's this is strange because you don't you don't get I don't remember if there was any kind of introduction on the video, but in the perception was you're somebody sitting alone in a room, and then you're on stage in a close up saying something very personal that doesn't seem like it's a joke.

[00:56:30.140] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[00:56:31.140] - Speaker 2
And we don't even know that there's an I when I say you're on stage. We don't know that yet. And we don't see any audience or hear any audience. And it's just strange. It's like we've never seen anything like this before. And it felt right immediately. It felt whatever this is, it's interesting and it's personal. And I wanted to know more right away. It's like, um, it opened a possibility in my mind that I didn't know. I didn't know it could be like this. Mm. Right. Right out of the box. So I love it. And I've showed it to so many people, even in meetings as an example of doing something radical. It's like, look at how this starts.

[00:57:13.580] - Speaker 1
Well, it's funny because that was it's all working backward from what's true. And and I'm so thankful to be able to work with Bo one. He's a genius. How did you meet Bo? Me and Bo met like, uh, and like an agent tried to introduce us at some point when he would visit LA when I first moved to LA and, uh. And, you know, we never really became friends until, uh, right before my first special. And, uh, you know, we just we met like, I saw him at a movie theater, um, and complimented Zach Stone because he had a show called Zach Stone was going to be famous. And I love that show. And I ran up on him just even just as a fan. Just. Hey, man, I love your show. It's great. I just wanted to say hi. Whatever. Then, uh, he hit me later, like, on Twitter when I stood out on Twitter, and. And then we became friends.

[00:58:25.620] - Speaker 1
It pretty immediately, uh, got very close because I think he's the friend I was. I've been looking for for a long time. Uh, someone of we're from we're so different, but, um, similar circumstances. Both kind of found ourselves or found something that worked and became pretty successful, pretty young and pretty quickly, uh, and kind of lived our lives the same, like in search of experiences and, and, uh, we always joke that we live like there was this movie called Blank Check, and it was about a kid who got $1 million, like some somebody hit his bike and gave him a blank check, and he filled it in for $1 million and just obviously went crazy. And that's how we live. Like when we're just like at, like Universal Studios, like, you know, 10 p.m. on a Tuesday, like, for no reason, uh, and and he understood me and, and I just trusted him, you know, um, I, I still trust him, but so much, like, with my life, you know, and I say that about Ari as well, but Bo is someone, um, who I say everything to and give everything to.

[01:00:02.460] - Speaker 1
And so, um, when we're talking about eight, at first, uh, I wanted him to direct, and he said no, he. It was the first thing he he directed. And I said, you should direct it. He was like, no. He said, you should get Steve McQueen to direct. Right. Just like throwing a lob out there. I hadn't even really seen anything of Steve McQueen. I watched him, obviously. It's incredible. I'm like, fine, I'll take a meeting with Steve McQueen. He says first he says no, he. I asked him, I was like, uh, will you direct my special? He's like, he's like, no, I'm not interested in that. And then and then I came back to bowl. I was like, uh, Steve McQueen said, no, you got to do it. And then he said yes. Steve later said, yes. And my ego wants to say that I don't need to say that, but I want to say it because he, you know, he saw my he saw my stand up and was like, he'd be down, but it would have been something else.

[01:00:57.900] - Speaker 1
I really wanted to do it because Beau understood me and he understood, like we kind of just trimmed the fat, the things that weren't necessary to me. Again, it's for. it's just tailor made to me and where I was at the time as a performer and not being again, I've always wanted to make specials for television. The first one with spike didn't quite come. I wasn't bold enough to have a complete vision of it. Um, and I didn't know how to implement it. And so it was like there was some good that came out of it, but it was sort of a botched collaboration. I didn't want to do that again. Um, and Bo just understood, like at that point, just the intro didn't make any sense. It didn't make any sense for me. And we talked about things like that, not even viewing them as radical. Radical, just viewing them as true. It was just true. And we talked about all these things and had, you know, uh, and again, he's just very, very good and knows how to create an experience.

[01:02:01.340] - Speaker 1
And I am an excited and willing participant in that. And, you know, we make really good stuff together because of that.

[01:02:10.860] - Speaker 2
Absolutely. And it's interesting too, because his it seems I don't know him. Well, you brought him out to dinner with us one time before I knew who he was. Yeah. And I remember our whole dinner. He didn't. I don't think he said one word.

[01:02:21.580] - Speaker 1
No, no, no, no, he'll listen. I got a big mouth that I'm.

[01:02:24.660] - Speaker 2
Just like, oh, like no.

[01:02:26.140] - Speaker 1
In another. And it was like, especially in a new situation. It'll be and.

[01:02:30.580] - Speaker 2
I, I feel like his sense of humor and your sense of humor seem really different.

[01:02:38.580] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[01:02:40.060] - Speaker 2
Yeah. His comedy and your comedy are really different. Both really funny, but not in the same lane at all.

[01:02:47.660] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Um, and it's funny because we we make each other laugh a lot. Like, maybe.

[01:03:01.140] - Speaker 2
That's why, though. Maybe if it was, if you were more similar, it wouldn't be as funny.

[01:03:05.300] - Speaker 1
Yeah. We have just such different perspectives on life. Like, uh, we we like to joke that even our race, like me being black, him being white is the least of our differences. It's like like like who we are fundamentally as people is so different. And and I think we both like to listen to each other. And, and I learn a lot from Bo. And, and I think he takes some things from me in how, uh, I've chosen to live life. And I think it, I think we complement each other well in, in work. Um, um, even to the point, I think he, uh, outpaced me in some ways in eight, um, where I think for what he brought to it, he was operating at a more fluent level than I was at the time I was trying. I'm drunk in the back, I'm trying to figure that out. And, uh, and and so I, you know, for rothaniel, I came more prepared, I believe, more prepared to, to be open to, uh, to give more of myself, uh, to be directed without ego, um, with true collaboration.

[01:04:36.180] - Speaker 1
Uh, yeah, I was I was ready then in a way that I wasn't. And, um, and our friendship had grown accordingly, even after after one of the reasons me and Beau were so close is because even after that odd, odd taping. Um, you know, no one, no one called me out on it, right? Because it was a was a little embarrassing and would have been embarrassing. And it's not like it was a consistent problem or required an intervention. But no, no one. No one in my life, no one who was there.

[01:05:15.380] - Speaker 2
But you were doing an experiment and you were as you you said as was said to you. You were playing with house money. You already had what you needed and now you were looking for where? Where can we go further?

[01:05:29.020] - Speaker 1
True. But I still did. I did something that was bold, if not dangerous. Right? But. But even just the fact that no one even acknowledged it, I won't even say called me out. No one else acknowledged that. Like the oddness of that night. And I woke up the next morning and I remember just obviously so hungover, and I did oh, hello on Broadway. I had to be on Broadway that day, like John Mulaney and Nick Kroll Show. I was like a guest. And so, like, I'm hungover from it. And, um, I didn't see Beau that whole day. But then we talked. He was on the plane. He was going back to LA. And I started already feeling the need to kind of apologize and try and, like, control what had happened in saying, oh, man, I hit a wall. And he was like, I'm going to stop you right there. I don't need the spin because I was going to blame.

[01:06:31.340] - Speaker 1
I had a cold and I was it was I was drinking a little bit, but it was also the NyQuil, you know, like like trying to blame medicine. And he was like, don't, don't spin it for me. And I loved being called out. I didn't like it in the moment, but I really appreciated it. Um, because he's, he's honest with me and, uh, and has always been.

[01:06:51.660] - Speaker 2
How did you first hook up with HBO? How did that come to be?

[01:06:55.020] - Speaker 1
HBO was, Uh, I, I was really precious about being on TV. I was really precious about my first time. And for a minute, I thought I wanted to do Letterman, you know, before Letterman retired. And, uh. And I didn't want to. I would get offers from certain shows and, like Lopez tonight and these things. And I just wanted it to be something else. I was very, very specific about, uh, you know what? I wanted my set to be on television. It's a miracle being on TV is a miracle, you know? And that was a Jerry Lewis quote. He was like, I don't call it TV. I call it television because it's a miracle. And I felt I feel that way. It is a miracle. Um, and and so, you know, just kind of being a little snobbish about it, I waited, I wanted HBO, you know? I felt like Netflix, you know? I remember having a dinner and one of my friends or someone I worked with before going to work at Netflix, and, and I think this was even before Robbie Praw got there, uh, who I knew from Montreal.

[01:08:15.420] - Speaker 1
And Netflix wanted to do a special with me, but HBO just seemed more selective. It just seemed like a, like a a more specific pool. And I like that. I like that there weren't a lot. I just appreciated the curation, or at least by limited number, the, the feeling of curation. Um, and I wanted that. And they had a deal with Funny or Die and, uh, to do a handful of specials, and, uh, I got one of those. And so, you know, um, uh, that was that was it that was like Nina came to see me in LA. She at a show that, um, went horribly because I didn't like the idea of auditioning for anything and just being a rebellious artist who's, like, trying new stuff and riffing and whatever. And then, uh, she came to see another set that was more focused. Uh, and, yeah, I got the special and, and, and I think I've maintained a relationship with them by trying new things.

[01:09:34.100] - Speaker 1
Um, I'm very thankful for that partnership. I'm thankful for Nina. Um, and I've been working with, like, Amy and Casey, and everyone there has been pretty open to my ideas, which is all you can ask for because you're still asking for money to make a thing. And it is, you know, a A gamble, especially as my work gets more and more personal because it's like it's starting like, all right, a special with spike Lee. Great, right? But then it's another thing to say, hey, can I ask for money to just take some cameras to North Carolina and shoot something with my family? It's like, what are you doing? You know, and and my work started getting more personal and a lot of my work, even when I wasn't doing stand up, I made some documentaries with HBO. That was me digging, just excavating my past, trying to grow, trying to figure things out, figuring out with cameras. A lot of what I'm doing now started then with Nina trusting me with HBO, trusting me with money to go make something.

[01:10:32.500] - Speaker 1
And so it's been a good relationship. It's been, you know, really, really healthy. And I try and give them my best. I try and give them everything I am like, I'm putting everything like my work there. I'm really, really proud of. I'm really, really proud. And it's been a lot. And I've experimented with other comedians and with myself and made stuff that I. That excites me. You know, and I'm. Yeah, yeah.

[01:10:59.940] - Speaker 2
How did you decide to sit for Rothaniel?

[01:11:05.860] - Speaker 1
I was telling stories and it made sense. And Cosby sat and it started making sense. Some of his decisions started making sense to me as I got more personal. Uh, and not sitting on a stool. I wasn't trying to be cool. Um, me and Bob has a pejorative that he throws at me when I slip back into old habits. He says, you're up there. Swagging out. Stop Swagging out up there. And it allows me to feel comfortable, but still alert. And it just felt right. I sat down and I was like, oh, this is how I Want to tell stories.

[01:11:49.660] - Speaker 2
Um, did that happen between that first show? That Bo. So the first show Bo saw? Yeah. Coming back was like, you're standing.

[01:12:00.220] - Speaker 1
Up at the Comedy.

[01:12:00.860] - Speaker 2
Store. You're a million miles away. Yeah.

[01:12:02.660] - Speaker 1
And then the next one.

[01:12:04.700] - Speaker 2
You're closer. Are you sitting yet or not yet?

[01:12:07.420] - Speaker 1
The next one I sat the next one at flappers I sat. Wow. And that changed a lot. Wow. It changed a lot.

[01:12:14.460] - Speaker 2
Um, just. Is it funny how something as simple as deciding to sit or stand changes things?

[01:12:20.700] - Speaker 1
Yeah, yeah, it's all. But it's a lot of things that pushed me into that chair. Like. Like the weight of every story and what I needed to say. And it just it all. It all made sense. It all made sense. All the influence, all of it. It just. It started making sense.

[01:12:39.100] - Speaker 2
I feel like the next special you're going to be laying on the on the stage. I'll be like you, I'll be like you.

[01:12:44.020] - Speaker 1
Barefoot laid out.

[01:12:49.230] - Speaker 2
You're describing yourself to me as a comedian on television, more than a stand up comedian giving live shows. I mean, you don't go on tour. You rarely go on tour. You don't want to go on tour. That's not your you're not aspiring to go on tour. You're aspiring to make television.

[01:13:09.950] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Yeah. Because. Um, it just makes sense for what I want to offer. I want to offer a unique experience. Like, every time, and I don't if if I toured it. And sure, I could do it for money. Um, but it would affect the product. It would affect what I'm doing. And I think Chappelle does a great job of being a touring comedian, but keeping, um, his television appearance is unique and organic and, um, I do feel similar to him in, in that way. And that's different from how Chris Rock operates. And Chris always he tells me, you know, like like, oh, this wouldn't work on tour. Like, you know, just about my set. And he's right in many ways I could, but it wouldn't be building toward a special when I, when I do a lot of dates or, uh, a lot of consecutive shows, they are just unique in their own way. They're their own.

[01:14:16.830] - Speaker 2
And you're working through the ideas and then once they work through, there's nothing left to examine.

[01:14:22.310] - Speaker 1
Yes. Yeah. So it's more about the idea than I'm crafting a feeling or being in touch with a feeling more than I'm crafting a joke or finding the punchline. Uh, and so it just it doesn't quite work in that way on tour. Um, and I would change for audiences in a way that I think would compromise the what makes it unique on television. That could change. I'm not saying it like that's permanent. There may be, and that's why I'm leaving room for that. I'm not. I'm not saying I'll never go on tour. I may be inspired to do that, but. But as of now, for what I want to make, I have to work. And I do a lot of shows to work, but I but the you know, even when I do shows, it's a different thing every time is a different flier, every time a different name and a different thing that I'm focused on. And that's the show and that's that show. And I have to let that be that show, and I have to move on.

[01:15:29.750] - Speaker 2
What was the comedy that you remember watching on television growing up?

[01:15:35.990] - Speaker 1
Comic view. Comic view. Every night, 10:00 bet. Um, some Def Comedy Jam. Bill Cosby himself, Richard Pryor live on the Sunset Strip, then live in concert. Kings of comedy. Tommy Davidson, Elon and Philly. Um, yeah. Yeah. Uh, and there are people that I just grew up loving. Don DC Curry, Cedric the Entertainer.

[01:16:13.350] - Speaker 2
Um, was comedy your favorite thing to see on TV?

[01:16:19.070] - Speaker 1
Yes. Yes. Shows. Um, me and my mom have similar tastes in sitcoms like, like, like The Cosby Show and Everybody Loves Raymond and stuff like that. Um, we like more serious comedy, if that makes sense. Like things that aren't too silly or absurd. I, I, we laughed at things that probably weren't comedies. Um, probably the clearest explanation of my sense of humor is that I think the movie Menace to Society is funnier than the parody movie. Don't be a menace in South Central while drinking your juice in the hood, which takes elements of that. But like, I think that. Things played real and reality is is funnier than, you know, telling. Like, sometimes people are intentionally funny, you know, and I can be intentionally funny, but I just think, you know, life plays out funnier.

[01:17:20.590] - Speaker 2
Do you do you laugh a lot in life?

[01:17:22.950] - Speaker 1
Oh, all the time. Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah. I laugh and before rothaniel, I was way funnier in my in my real life than I had been on stage because it was like, filtered. And I was trying to be to be provocative in certain ways, and so. And I knew for the show that I would have to sacrifice certain laughs for certain points, and I was okay with that, but I was I do laugh a lot, and my friends are very, very funny.

[01:17:49.830] - Speaker 2
Oh, but do you laugh a lot at things that might not be funny?

[01:17:55.870] - Speaker 1
Yeah, the absurdity of certain things, but. But also just funny things, you know? And I watch things. Uh, me and Beau love watching, like, Roast Me, which is this all def digital show that has just a bunch of dudes in a room just roasting each other. And it's so funny, you know, it's just funny. I love that, um, uh, you know, but but I'll say honestly, my my tolerance for that is I'm not to sound pretentious like my tolerance, but like, I stop laughing when I can see you trying to tell me a joke. And so I. Although I consume a high volume of comedy, a lot of it is critical. When I watch, a lot of it is just like seeing the strings and, and and, you know, uh, yeah. Yeah, seeing the strings a lot. And, you know, it just has to be to me, it has to be tied to some type of consequence that defines for for it to be funny to me, like consequence free humor, especially if it if the humor is alluding to being dangerous, if that danger isn't real in some way and you can't feel it, then it just starts to lose it for me.

[01:19:20.950] - Speaker 1
So like even in sitcom, like Everybody Loves Raymond, you could tell it's just like rooted in some reality of a dynamic. And that's funnier than, like, you know, a space comedy, you know, for me.

[01:19:34.950] - Speaker 2
Is comedy about things not making sense.

[01:19:41.830] - Speaker 1
Sometimes. Sometimes it's it's. I love, uh, things that lead to a lot of questions like. Wait, what? Like, what does that mean? You know, like, I love that, um. Uh, sometimes. Sometimes it's about tension. Sometimes it's about saying things, uh, and taking some leap. Um, yeah, it's different ways. Sometimes it's about. Yeah, making sense of things. So yeah.

[01:20:15.590] - Speaker 2
When you did Rothaniel, do you think of it? And I'll ask it in the most provocative way. Do you think of it as stand up comedy?

[01:20:28.070] - Speaker 1
Yes, yes. I used to used to get up early on in it, I. Uh, would get angry with any criticism that it was something else or or I looked at it being called something else as a dismissal, because of course it is. It's a person on a stage for an hour or whatever amount of time speaking. It is a one man show. There are elements, probably of a traditional one man show that I incorporate, but it's still it's still the art form, you know, and I think, look, I want to contribute to it, I want it, I want it to grow and I want it to not be defined so narrowly. And, and I, I, I do it as I see it. Um, uh, so yeah, it is, it is for sure. For sure. Um, I think me and a lot of, uh, stand up comedians do different things. I think that's okay. You know. But. But it is.

[01:21:44.430] - Speaker 1
Stand up.

[01:21:47.830] - Speaker 2
I feel like the, um, the label, just to me, the labels just make it smaller. It's like you can use it to organize a genre. Uh, and for some reason, I think of it as the label making it smaller. Like. Like, um. Is it. It's like if if a comedian gets on stage and does an hour and doesn't tell any jokes and nobody laughs, is it stand up comedy? I don't know. Yeah, I don't know.

[01:22:31.590] - Speaker 1
No, I don't know.

[01:22:32.270] - Speaker 2
Now, the other side of it is though, if you don't, if you take the label away. Was that a compelling performance and do you want to see that? Are you excited by it? Do you like the, you know, the fact that it's different.

[01:22:43.870] - Speaker 1
And then the laughs may come? I mean, it's like what's what's interesting about the dice album, the day the laughter died? Is that like, is that it? What is it? And what it is in the room is different than what it is on record. Yeah.

[01:22:57.190] - Speaker 2
The tension of the people not laughing.

[01:22:59.630] - Speaker 1
Is funny now. So it's part of the show. So he gets credit for playing that show in a way that's interesting. You captured an interesting, funny thing. It is funny. Yeah. Just there there are multiple ways in. Um, and it shouldn't be the same thing over and over.

[01:23:21.430] - Speaker 2
It can't be.

[01:23:22.230] - Speaker 1
It can't be. It's not die. Yeah, it will die. And I see stand up comedy sometimes. And I mean, not to sound gross, but it just seems dead sometimes. I'm like, it just feels so dead and I don't want to shoot it. Like, you know, I want to I want to like, I want to feel alive, and I. And I want the art form to be alive.

[01:23:46.870] - Speaker 2
When did you originally fall in love with reading?

[01:23:53.150] - Speaker 1
Mr. neary? My eighth grade teacher, who I didn't want because he was loud. In seventh grade, he had the classroom next door to me and I didn't want him. I was like anybody but him. Of course I get him. I asked my mom if I could switch teachers. I didn't want anything to do with it. Like anything that starts like that, of course. He's the teacher that changed my life and and got me to read the autobiography of Malcolm X, which was huge. And two newspaper articles every day. That was a requirement for this class. You had to read and be informed. And two things that you not special interests, not your, you know, wouldn't let the boys read from the sports section or anything like something that you didn't know anything about. And so like, you know, finance section or the world section.

[01:24:45.870] - Speaker 2
Find something interesting, find.

[01:24:47.190] - Speaker 1
Something interesting, read two articles. You had to write about it every day. And so that that began me reading just like the habit of of reading. And it's, um, you know, a habit that I picked up off and on. And there were years when I was probably only reading Wikipedia page entries and, but, uh, then, you know, uh, later in life or even more recently, I was working, uh, with, uh, Scott Rudin on something Then, and he sent me a novel. And, uh, I never really read, uh, fiction. And that picked up, like, it picked up again. I was, like, very, very interested in reading. And then I, uh, bought the the George Saunders book. Uh, swim in the pond in the rain, just with a collection of Russian short stories. And that changed storytelling for me. Like, like that was huge for me. It's a great class in a book and and it's it's just incredible.

[01:26:04.350] - Speaker 1
And I never told stories before then. And like a lot of changes in my life and therapy and that book and like, it's one of the things that really pushed me to to understand stories and tell them, Uh. And when.

[01:26:22.430] - Speaker 2
Was that?

[01:26:23.910] - Speaker 1
Recently. A couple years ago. But like, as far as storytelling. But I've been reading and that that book was just one that I grabbed. And then that changed the direction of like, you know, of the types of books that I wanted to read. Um, and now my boyfriend is a writer, and, and, uh, I mean, he reads so much and I feel so far behind. And it's exciting because he has me reading things that I never would have picked up and things that excite me. And, and, and sometimes we read together and sometimes he reads to me and, and it's, um, uh, it's been very important to me.

[01:27:07.790] - Speaker 2
The George Sanders story is interesting in that you didn't read it looking for. You didn't read it looking for information to help your work. You just randomly picked it up. Yeah, you read it and it changed your whole approach to what you do.

[01:27:27.670] - Speaker 1
Completely. Completely.

[01:27:30.030] - Speaker 2
I didn't know what a story was.

[01:27:31.310] - Speaker 1
I didn't know what the requirement of a story was. Like, what did what do people look for? And I usually didn't tell them. I would give, uh, you know, facts about an event, but then mostly commentary. I would give commentary. My whole life, it was just like, oh, a fight happened at school. This is where I was, you know, this is how I felt. But just like like that, that told me, you know, what to look for and where you could look and and that a story can come in different forms and that it's not always like, neat and.

[01:28:09.230] - Speaker 2
And send me a link to that book when we're done. For sure. I'd love to. I'd love to see that.

[01:28:13.070] - Speaker 1
I love that, and it's a it's it. He's released another book since then, but it's the book before his most recent one, and it's incredible. And he gives lessons on the story in the book. So it's a lot of, um, like Tolstoy, Tolstoy or just all these Russian authors. I think there are seven. Um, and he, you know, he's a teacher in Syracuse, a professor in Syracuse. And, uh, he basically gives a class in the book, and I'm so thankful for it. Even without the class, even the the the collection of the stories themselves, even. Because at first I wasn't even reading his lessons on it. I was just reading. It was a good excuse to read the stories and just game changing for me.

[01:29:02.150] - Speaker 2
That sounds great.

[01:29:03.190] - Speaker 1
Yeah, yeah.

[01:29:04.310] - Speaker 2
Do you, um, do you think you're more inspired by comedy or music or movies or reading or something else.

[01:29:19.750] - Speaker 1
I get really obsessed with a thing, and it kind of becomes all I can talk about or reference. And it could be. It's different things. Sometimes it's centered on a person. Like recently it was all things JFK.

[01:29:38.270] - Speaker 2
Just obsessed with what started that.

[01:29:40.430] - Speaker 1
I've always kind of had an obsession with him and like, my boyfriend really put me put into context, like the importance of Camelot or the idea of JFK on culture now, and how it all kind of began with, like, you know, the idea of him and Jackie and, you know, our cultural obsession with his life and how it was documented and how, you know, how it ended, and then the secrets and how, you know, all those things coming out. So you kind of learn about a person. And I was always obsessed with his in many ways, like the duality of him, like him and Martin Luther King. Just obsessed as much with the secrets of their lives and the affairs. And, you know, JFK's pills or Martin Luther King's suicide attempts and these things that are kind of buried. And the idea of their lives. And so I've always been interested in things with the like, the like peeking behind the curtain. And it's probably my obsession with my father.

[01:30:44.670] - Speaker 1
I think it's also.

[01:30:45.310] - Speaker 2
Getting back to closer to authenticity and the truth, not just the surface narrative that's presented, but the real story is much more interesting.

[01:30:55.910] - Speaker 1
Yeah, yeah. And I saw that reflected in myself, keeping a secret and feeling like I'm kind of that. And and my father, who I knew about his secrets early on and seeing how he was received in the in the world and, you know, weighing that against the things that I knew. So always like obsession with secrets and lives like that. So being obsessed with JFK means that I'm watching the Oliver Stone documentary. Uh, and then my boyfriend buys me the book. The, um, the Lee Harvey Oswald, uh, Frank DiLeo. Uh, Frank DiLeo.

[01:31:38.230] - Speaker 2
I don't think so.

[01:31:39.230] - Speaker 1
No, um.

[01:31:39.790] - Speaker 2
I can't remember the.

[01:31:40.470] - Speaker 1
Leo book on. Oh, I haven't read yet, but, uh, and and, uh, there's a documentary called primary that follows JFK through the Wisconsin primaries, and, like, it's just incredible. And so I'm watching that, and I'm just just like, just, uh, then I go to Ireland, you know, and I stay in the hotel that he stayed in in Ireland and, um, you know, just feeling real connected to him. And that may play out. When? When I was with you in Italy, I was Julius Caesar.

[01:32:15.270] - Speaker 2
Wow. I was just obsessed.

[01:32:16.910] - Speaker 1
With Caesar and reading things Caesar and reading things Michelangelo to and, like obsessed with these people. And that kind of leads me there, like, leads me to, to Rome. And, and I just find these obsessions and so obsessions like that kind of play out in my life, um, in art around those things someone recommends a movie or someone recommends, you know, like, like, you know, I'm constantly obsessed with Jesus Christ. So that that could mean the Bible or Scorsese and Willem Dafoe, you know, it just it just.

[01:32:52.590] - Speaker 2
Do you ever see Bad Boy Bubby?

[01:32:54.990] - Speaker 1
You recommend a bad, bad boy Bubby is incredible. The opening of Bad Boy Bubby before he leaves the house is terrifying.

[01:33:01.590] - Speaker 2
Terrifying.

[01:33:02.590] - Speaker 1
It's it's such a feeling.

[01:33:04.590] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[01:33:05.310] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[01:33:05.910] - Speaker 2
I remember a friend of mine brought me to see that movie. And in those first 5 or 10 minutes, whatever it was, I just said to him, like, why did you bring me to this? Why am I seeing this? Yes, yes. I don't want to see this.

[01:33:18.070] - Speaker 1
I can't believe it. You can't believe it?

[01:33:20.950] - Speaker 2
Yeah. Then what it turns into is so interesting.

[01:33:24.750] - Speaker 1
Yes, well, it has you. It's telling such such an audacious story and such a truthful way. Because there's one thing to be audacious and then, you know, capturing it absurdly to to save it to, you know, and then that that wouldn't have been as effective. This is like just played out as true the, the reality of his life. And that's so interesting and I yeah, I the movie has you um, have you ever seen Julia Ducournau's raw? Um, I was obsessed with that movie and then I watched it and. Yeah, I mean, again, it's a story that could be in less capable hands with just. You'd be able to dismiss it as like a, you know, some gruesome tale. But because it's treated so honestly, you know, and delicately, it's just it's it's it's fascinating.

[01:34:30.750] - Speaker 2
I have a hard time watching, uh, unpleasant stuff. I don't want to feel that way.

[01:34:36.590] - Speaker 1
Same same same.

[01:34:37.630] - Speaker 2
I like watching I want to feel peace.

[01:34:41.110] - Speaker 1
But that's why capable hands can take you to unpleasant places. I mean, you look at Quentin Tarantino. Incredible. You know what makes his his him brilliant is that he finds these interesting, tense moments in, in very unpleasant stories. And you laugh and you feel and you can be carried through this gruesomeness.

[01:35:06.910] - Speaker 2
Also like a campiness about it that makes it okay.

[01:35:11.350] - Speaker 1
Yeah, a little bit safer.

[01:35:12.590] - Speaker 2
Yeah, it feels like it's done with a wink in some way.

[01:35:16.590] - Speaker 1
Yes, yes.

[01:35:18.190] - Speaker 2
Which is funny because I wouldn't think I would like that, but I really do. Well, because the way he does.

[01:35:21.910] - Speaker 1
Because he does. I mean, you know, it's balance, right. Because and you take like Django, that's such a feat. Like anytime people talk about like, what you can and you can't do, I'm like, there's a white man who's so good that he has the funniest slave movie. You know, and like, and it's something that, like, you know, a black filmmaker should have made a black filmmaker should have made. Uh, Django. Right. Because, you know, black people are hilarious. But like, a lot of times, you know, it's treated so delicately uh, that it. You know, too much respect. It's too much respect. Yeah. It's not. And and Django is hilarious and true and true. Like, you know, played so realistically and it's horrible and disgusting conditions and then moments of levity and moments where it's like, you know, who's that nigger on that horse? Or, you know, just these very funny moments and, uh, yeah, yeah, you can do anything, you know, you can do anything.

[01:36:37.310] - Speaker 2
Was was social media already a thing when you were coming up? Already doing comedy?

[01:36:44.310] - Speaker 1
Um, it was beginning. It was. I started in the, uh, in the Dane Cook boom. Dane Cook hit, you know, made millions. And so that meant that when you signed up signed up for the open mic at the improv, they had a space. I remember you have your name and it would say MySpace.com slash for you to fill in your Myspace. This is 2008 and you know, it was always that expectation of when I came up. It was the beginning of that. Um, and, uh, I hadn't met Bo yet, but he was, uh, you know, made his living from YouTube. And there were examples of that happening in comedy was was shifting in that way. And honestly, if I waited maybe two years, I might be a different comedian because I might have, um, I might have stayed home and, um, I was already making videos with my friends. And it's funny because I see, uh, in some, like, young comedians that make content maybe for YouTube or Instagram or Instagram or TikTok.

[01:37:59.910] - Speaker 1
I see myself in things that I made, just not for the internet, but just recorded on my camcorder. I'm like, oh yeah, we made sketches like that. And then in that way and the improv, the improvising you have to do when you're at home and your resources are just your family and your friends and the neighborhood. And I might have been a different comedian two years later.

[01:38:23.670] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[01:38:24.470] - Speaker 1
But, um, I'm glad I came in when I did because I also came up on stages. So it is true to me to to perform in that way. Uh, but yeah, it was big. I kind of rebelled against it because I just, I was like, I'm doing live performance. I just want to make that my thing. And, and, um, I didn't want to service, like, two masters. Like, if I'm like.

[01:38:55.190] - Speaker 2
Would be a distraction. Well, if.

[01:38:56.670] - Speaker 1
I'm filming myself, then let's do it for real. Like, I don't want to just have, like I was precious with when the Laugh Factory, um, started a YouTube channel, they would just put comedians videos up there, and I hated that. I used to get mad. I would call the office until, like, I saw it was getting like, good comments or something. Okay, you can keep it up. But I would get mad because I was very precious about it. I was like, If I'm going to film this, then I'm going to film it. I don't want to half do it. I don't want to kind of do it. So, um. Yeah, yeah, yeah, I didn't I didn't film sets, I didn't post things. I still don't have a website. A friend asked me the other night if I had a website, I was like, oh no, I don't, I still don't, and I should I'm probably I've taken it probably too far, but I just don't want to service it.

[01:39:49.190] - Speaker 1
So I don't think about it. Yeah.

[01:39:51.470] - Speaker 2
When you were coming up, did you see any comedians that just blew your mind.

[01:39:56.710] - Speaker 1
Well, my first thought is Angelo Bowers, who was a comedian from Modesto. I was talking about him earlier today. He's a comedian from Modesto who dropped out of college, moved to LA, was young around my age, and he worked so hard. How hard he worked inspired me because he did a new set all the time. Sometimes he would bomb and that was as interesting as watching him kill like it was, because he worked so hard and it was new and you could could see that he was trying. And he I mean, Angelo was so strange, I loved it. He would in LA, he would sit on the subway all day and write jokes in the subway because he didn't have cell phone service down there, and he didn't want to be distracted, or he would go to the borders on Sunset and Vine and just work all day. So I started going to the Barnes and Noble at the Grove, and we called it our office and we respected each other's office. He would text me if he was going to the grove.

[01:40:58.640] - Speaker 1
He was like, hey, I'm going to be at your office today if you. You know, I wanted to give you your space like. And we worked really hard and we became, uh, like, uh, like a duo in the open mic scene in a way. Like, it was like Gerard and Angelo. Like, we rose really, really fast because we both worked really, really hard. We dedicated our lives to it. Um, um, we did nothing else. We had no, no normal life, like, you know, I remember mocking a comedian who asked another comedian where a hookah bar was. I was like, what are you doing? You haven't made it. You're like smoking hookah. Like. Like, I occasionally went to the movies and Angelo took Saturdays off, so I took Saturdays off, too. Like, I kind of followed his schedule.

[01:41:45.320] - Speaker 2
Tell me about. Tell me about Barnes and Noble as your office, what the experience was like.

[01:41:50.040] - Speaker 1
That was where I would go and read. Yep. Read. Um. And just write. Just write. And I was writing more just traditional jokes at the time, but it was being fed by a lot of books. Just just things I wouldn't normally read, biographies of people I didn't know about or, or, um, you know, I would go into the self-help section because I would normally mock those things. So I would read it and, um, uh, magazines and just read things and then write. And it was, it was where you could find me, you know, I'd wake up, go on a walk, hit the Barnes and Noble, read, read, read, write, write, write, go to an open mic and perform. Um, and it became so much my office that my first audition was for this TV show called New Girl on Fox, and I just got managers and they were like, you should go on auditions. And I figured I'd go to learn.

[01:42:53.280] - Speaker 1
I was like, oh, I'll learn how to how to audition or whatever. And I was like, but but I told him at the beginning I was like, yeah, I'll do it just for the sake of learning. But, you know, I don't I don't want the, the part. And they said, yeah, yeah, okay. Do the audition. I did it. They liked me. They called me back again. I said, okay, well, look, I'll go to this callback, but for the experience of knowing what a callback is, I don't want to do this TV show. They said, yeah, yeah, okay. Go back. I do it now. All of a sudden I'm getting calls from a lawyer. My manager is like, I'm connecting you with this lawyer. He's going over your contract. You have an offer. They're like, they're offering me this part for a show. And I'm like, I don't want this. One of the. The guys.

[01:43:37.280] - Speaker 1
I was on the show, Max Greenfield. I know he has to remember this. He like. Like I turned it down. He came to the Barnes and Noble. He brought this comedian, Kevin Christie, uh, To Barnes and Noble and they they were having an intervention with me, like, just like, like at the Barnes and Noble, just being like, hey, what you're doing is crazy. You're turning down like, forget the money. I mean, they were talking more. I'm sleeping on a couch at this point. I'm sleeping on this woman leaves this couch. I, I they're saying, I mean, maybe, like, I could have made half $1 million or some, some crazy amount of money from $0 to half $1 billion, like by signing. And I just didn't want the part. I didn't see it as part of what I wanted to do. And they're at the Barnes and Noble being like, you're crazy, you're crazy. And I was like, I know, thank you, but but but yeah, they came to my office to try to convince me to do New Girl.

[01:44:36.560] - Speaker 1
Um, but I wanted to just sit there and read and write and had a open mic that night. I remember I was starting to get shows.

[01:44:44.720] - Speaker 2
Did the did the fact that there were other people in the Barnes and Noble. Was that part of it, too? Was that the fact that there were people coming and going, or was it just you and people watching?

[01:44:54.360] - Speaker 1
It was definitely some people watching, but always, you know, and that was walking around. LA was such a new experience for me, and especially being a southern boy and moving out. It's the first place I lived, um, outside of home. And so everywhere, just walking up and down sunset, walking around Hollywood, that was always my domain. Somewhere between Highland and La Cienega and somewhere between Third Street and Hollywood. It was just all mine. And just walking around and seeing all the, the, the, you know, AHS ads and the billboards and the the homeless people and the transients and drug addicts and the wildness of those streets. Just seeing it all played out, um, was was so new to me and and magical in a way, and a lot of my earlier comedy reflected that. Just the things that I was seeing, like, you know, wrote a lot about homeless people because I'm walking amongst them, you know, and I'm kind of homeless myself and writing a lot about wealth and, and poverty and, and it was aspirational because it was just the reality of my experience.

[01:46:10.040] - Speaker 1
It was every day just walking. And I walked every. I didn't have a car in LA. I was just walking everywhere or catching the bus and just sitting in bookstores and writing, and that couldn't sustain look, that was great work ethic, but even even that, I needed to live life and experience the the rises and crashes of relationships, to even have anything to say and explore even my past, to even have something deeper to say. But at that time it served me well. It was, it was, it was. It was the army. It was college. It was, um, just work, work, work. Complete focus and dedication. No distractions. I didn't go home, I just worked.

[01:46:58.000] - Speaker 2
What was the difference in. The things that you noticed that were different about where you came from versus when you came to L.A. The first things you notice is like, what's different? Um.

[01:47:16.640] - Speaker 1
It's weird because, you know where I'm from. I lived in Morningside, and it was me and people like me, and that was it. And being in a small town, you live in these bubbles. And you, my my whole existence took place basically in Morningside. And, uh, you know, we had a I had a black principal and we and we went to the black dentist and the black pediatrician and lived in this bubble.

[01:47:46.720] - Speaker 2
Would there have been a Barnes and Noble there?

[01:47:48.800] - Speaker 1
No, there was no Barnes and.

[01:47:50.200] - Speaker 2
Noble would there? Like, tell me what the what was Main Street?

[01:47:53.560] - Speaker 1
I actually can't even tell you a bookstore. Oh, damn, I hate that. I couldn't, I couldn't tell you a bookstore.

[01:48:00.320] - Speaker 2
There might not have been one in small town.

[01:48:02.000] - Speaker 1
Yeah, not that I know of. There was. There were libraries and things, but it just wasn't. You know, we really just read the Bible. Um, but it was the things of that neighborhood. There was a Food Lion. Then they built a new Food Lion, and there was a Family Dollar. And my grandma lived on Pleasant Street, and I lived on the street right off of that Marble Street. And my aunts lived around the corner. Um, and, uh, you could.

[01:48:31.840] - Speaker 2
Walk or bike everywhere.

[01:48:33.520] - Speaker 1
I could ride my bike most places in the hood. My school, my, uh, elementary school, Forest Park. My grandma was a was a cafeteria lady there, and so my mom would drop me off at her house in the morning. Uh, like, I'd wake up at five, and then we'd go to school with my grandma and like, uh, it was all. All in the neighborhood.

[01:48:53.280] - Speaker 2
How many kids in your school?

[01:48:55.320] - Speaker 1
My elementary school was pretty big. Um, I want to say it was around 1000 kids, but it was just all black kids. The black kids. The Mexican kids. I think there was a few white teachers and a couple white students here or there. Um, and then my middle school also like same thing, just mostly black teachers and, uh, black kids. And then and then my high school was a different world because it was black and white and it was like 5050. And that was like a completely different experience for me. Um, and.

[01:49:28.800] - Speaker 2
Uh, good or bad?

[01:49:30.480] - Speaker 1
Good. Well, it taught me a lot. Um, because I'll tell the really short version of the story, I. I experienced a different type of freedom than I had before. Um, and I went to this, uh, mixed high school in ninth grade. And then in 10th grade, my friends were going to Parkland High School. Um, it was like the black school and named after the hospital that Kennedy, uh, died in. And, uh, I went because all my friends were going. And so I went for four days. Um, and it was a crazy four days because I forgot how I was treated at, like, like, kind of looked at suspiciously. I remember the things that I hated. Were there being a chain outside of the cafeteria for no student could cross. And at Glenn, the the mixed high school kids just left all the time. We went to Burger King for lunch. We drove around like you caught a ride to McDonald's or whatever, and and you had more freedom.

[01:50:42.160] - Speaker 1
It was kind of like a college campus. And here it was more like a prison.

[01:50:45.440] - Speaker 2
But do you think it was the age that you were or the fact that it was mixed?

[01:50:50.400] - Speaker 1
I think it was the fact that it was mixed because, you know, it was just more trust. It was just more freedom. I felt that I saw that I had a truancy officer. Once again, we would sneak to go to Burger King, and you weren't supposed to leave campus, but it was just an understood fact that students did and whatever. And I remember sneaking into my car to go to Burger King, me and some friends and, uh, like driving out and then being cut off by the sheriff's car. The officer got out was this black officer, and he was like, he was like, you know why I stopped you? And I was like, I was like, why? Because we go to Burger King. He was like, nah. He said, you see those white girls over there? They're going to Burger King, too. But y'all look suspicious about it. It's like y'all sneaking around in the parking lot. Of course I'm gonna stop you. It's like if you're going to go, just go.

[01:51:42.520] - Speaker 1
And so it was like it was a big lesson learned. But that was a huge thing for me just at Glenn. So that's why I left parkland after four days. I got my transfer. After I saw that chain, I was like, oh no, no, I'm going back to Glenn where I'm free and like, you know. And it was an interesting experience because it was like, have people from my hood in Morningside and have like, you know, kind of suburban or rural white kids. And sometimes we got along, sometimes there were fights and race related fights and, but but I learned a lot. But I said all that to say that that was my first experience of clashing, of cultures and clashing of, you know, money and no money. And LA was so much of that. It's so much of a Lamborghini zooming past a homeless man, or my first time downtown. It's just crazy because, you know, there's new restaurants with, you know, Christmas lights next to heroin addicts.

[01:52:39.560] - Speaker 1
And it was just wild. And just seeing all of that happening and playing out on the streets, you know, I knew crackheads and I saw violence, uh, in my hood. But it was separate than the, the, the from the money. You know, in New York, the same type of craziness, just like wealth and poverty played out next to each other. It's just wild. Um, and so LA was just, you know, it was Disney World. It was just Disney to me. It was all absurd. It was all crazy, you know? Um, uh, so I had a lot to write about.

[01:53:18.480] - Speaker 2
Sounds great.

[01:53:19.240] - Speaker 1
Yeah, it was exciting.

[01:53:20.120] - Speaker 2
Great adventure.

[01:53:20.760] - Speaker 1
Very, very exciting. Yeah.

[01:53:22.880] - Speaker 2
I remember the first time I came to LA. Um, I think the first time I came to LA was with the Beastie Boys, and it.

[01:53:30.040] - Speaker 1
Was really.

[01:53:30.760] - Speaker 2
Really fun. Just had a really fun experience.

[01:53:34.960] - Speaker 1
This is fresh from the dorm. This is like fresh.

[01:53:37.200] - Speaker 2
From probably still living in the dorm. Really? Yeah. Super fun. Yeah. Super fun. Um, do you remember your dreams?

[01:53:50.480] - Speaker 1
I always had dreams that I had specific dreams that I knew. If I achieved that, it meant a whole lot of other things. For instance, I wanted to be Michael Jackson's comedian friend. Like, I was like, oh, okay. The way Eddie Murphy was. And then Chris Tucker was, I'm gonna be Michael Jackson's comedian friend. Then he died within a year of me moving to LA. And I was devastated. I was like, where's my dream? Like, that was part of my that was one of my. Because I knew if I was that, then that probably meant success in so many other ways. and and and yeah I had like always really specific goals, you know, um, uh, my first special was a goal I wanted, I wanted a special on HBO, and I wanted a show on NBC. I remember those being goals. Uh, I, I, uh, you know, uh, a special on HBO, because that's where the cool people had specials and NBC because that's where Cosby and Seinfeld shows and and it seemed like the right time because I was like, oh, okay.

[01:55:05.240] - Speaker 1
It's been a while since like it, like they had, like a comedy. Like like a really personal specific, you know, uh, interesting comedy on NBC. And I can be the one that do that, you know? And I remember reading that Jerry Seinfeld said that it was his intention to save NBC because he saw that Bill Cosby said it. So I kind of set the same intention.

[01:55:32.920] - Speaker 2
You're in the lineage.

[01:55:33.760] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I felt like, okay, I'll be in that lineage. And, you know, I knew I could only do it by, you know, bringing some of my life to it. And that's how I made the show. And I didn't do it, but it was a goal. I was like, oh, that would be nice to just. It wasn't to save, but just to make a good show for NBC. I wanted to make the best show for NBC.

[01:55:54.120] - Speaker 2
I understand that, like, I know that in the music world, if you could, you know, see something that you made come out on the same label as LED Zeppelin or Bob Dylan, it's like it's a big deal that you can't believe. It's like, wow, our look, our labels look the same. Yes. That's so cool. Yeah, that sense of history.

[01:56:16.200] - Speaker 1
A sense of history and and a responsibility because again, I do love it and I anything that I do, I've been a A student of and and deeply immersed fan of and and so like I want it to be as good as the things that are good, you know. And so you feel this responsibility to uphold that, you know. Yeah, I like that.

[01:56:47.840] - Speaker 2
Yeah. I, uh, I love hearing you say that. I mean, I'm we have that in common, this desire to make great things at all. Whatever it takes, like, whatever it takes for it to be great. Otherwise, why make it?

[01:57:02.240] - Speaker 1
Why make it? But that's what that's like, going back to, like, live things and the Globes or SNL. It's like, all right. Like it's just such a miracle to go live in front of millions of people. Yeah. That's like. A chance you have a chance.

[01:57:23.080] - Speaker 2
When did you get asked to do SNL?

[01:57:26.680] - Speaker 1
I got asked to do SNL. Someone from SNL saw me maybe a couple weeks before filming Rothaniel. So I got asked to do it based off they saw, like the sets I was doing at at City Winery. And, uh, and so that's why I, I got SNL the night before Rothaniel came out. So like I did SNL April 1st, Rothaniel came out April 2nd.

[01:57:58.360] - Speaker 2
Wow.

[01:57:59.360] - Speaker 1
Uh, just based off the sets leading up to it. Um, and I wanted it to be it's own thing. And so it was like kind of, you know, I didn't want to distract from it, but I wanted to promote it. And so just wanting to make SNL a unique thing and rise to the occasion of it.

[01:58:18.120] - Speaker 2
And how was the experience?

[01:58:20.360] - Speaker 1
It was good. It was good. The monolog I didn't have until. Honestly, I'm still working on it at dress rehearsal and then did it live. But again, the excitement of live, I kind of needed it for that to even settle. Same thing with the Globes. I'm playing a spiritual game of musical chairs, testing everything, seeing if it's true, seeing it, seeing if it's right. You know, sometimes I feel the the urge to be chaotic and I'm like, what is that? I have to question that. I have to question it. And does it.

[01:58:57.000] - Speaker 2
Have to do with what's going on inside yourself or the environment? What do you what do you feel? What's the feedback loop?

[01:59:03.800] - Speaker 1
My place in it. Where do I belong? Here. Why am I here? What is the experience for somebody watching it? Even seeing me like an SNL. Like I'm just like, I know this has to be wild because I did SNL. I'm hosting SNL coming off of nothing. Yeah. You know, so I if you're watching SNL for the middle of the country, you know, I hadn't had a special out in four years. I made some small documentaries, like produced a couple things, but very quiet up until then. So it's fun to to kind of see it as an audience member and go, oh, some people are like, well, who is this? And so I'm kind of explaining myself most probably most. Yeah, most. So I'm like, you know, that's an exciting position to be in. I know I'm in that position. How do I speak to it? How do I make it, you know, this live experience, uh, worthwhile, uh, just trying to figure that out and that that takes being live to feel you kind of have to feel it in that moment.

[02:00:12.360] - Speaker 2
Um, because otherwise it would be performance.

[02:00:17.160] - Speaker 1
It would be would be performance, and my performance is the truth of where I am in that moment. That is my performance. So I have to connect with it.

[02:00:29.640] - Speaker 2
Yeah, I remember seeing that. I haven't watched SNL for a very long time, and I don't find it funny anymore. Yeah, but your monolog was like, whoa. SNL could be good.

[02:00:42.040] - Speaker 1
Because I was a little mad. I was a little angry that I had to even talk about it. That was true. I was just a little like and and I was excited to be there. All these things are true. I was excited and felt pushed into it and then wanted to rebel against that. And and so it was just not to beat the reference to death. But it is this game of musical chairs. It's happening right up until it's live with no delay.

[02:01:12.320] - Speaker 2
It's so interesting that that, um, that tightrope walk aspect of comedy. And I guess it's always that way when you're getting up in front of a bunch of people. Strangers.

[02:01:25.280] - Speaker 1
Um, yeah.

[02:01:26.240] - Speaker 2
Yeah, it's a hectic idea.

[02:01:28.040] - Speaker 1
Yeah, yeah. And I had to, over time, like, even reexamine that. My relationship with the audience.

[02:01:35.440] - Speaker 2
Um, so, uh, I got I got people hitting me about rothaniel mostly by people who didn't know we were friends. Yeah. And it was like, have you seen this thing? You have to see this thing. This is the greatest thing I've ever seen. Like, this is. This is it. And then I have other friends who are comedians who are just like, what is he doing? It's like, what is that? That's like. That's. Why would he put that out?

[02:02:09.280] - Speaker 1
Yeah, yeah. You know.

[02:02:09.880] - Speaker 2
Like, just like the. Yeah. So you get to see these like the poles Of people who are going in with no expectations being blown away. And then the people who have some sense of authority because they're experts in this. Yeah. Seeing it as well. That's not what we do.

[02:02:32.160] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Yeah. Which which is a response that I got and, um, kind of used to I think comedians uh, probably uh, as a community, I don't want to label all because I do think I receive a lot of love, uh, from the community. It took me a while to realize that, but I think it's received with some, you know, it's just it feels like I release Yeezus every time. It feels like two comics. I feel like I just kept releasing Yeezus, and they were like, what is that, or 808 or to something that people are just like what? Like every time, which I've learned to take as a good sign, you know, times that it's hurt and hurt my feelings before. Um, but but I know that's that's part of it. If if I want to do something different and I know, I know that that's not always just received with just hugs, you know, like and that's just that's part of it. That's, you know, um, uh, you kind of have to be hated to be the favorite.

[02:03:51.480] - Speaker 2
Yeah. It's one of the things I say in the book is that if everybody likes it, you're not going hard enough.

[02:03:56.360] - Speaker 1
Yeah, yeah, it's just not. And I know that. And it doesn't mean that it feels any better. It doesn't feel good to not be the thing that I think I, uh, God may be angry with it or the thing that I if I were to explain anything because I don't think it should be explained or or ever, you know, but I would say that rothaniel is a feat only because I was really afraid to say the things that I was saying. I the danger was in me walking on stage. This is why in bow really distilled that in the intro. Like the walk to the stage is very important in Rothaniel because I, I had reluctance, I had a lot of fear and it was hard. It was hard. And so, like, I couldn't fake that. Um, you know, I tried to be brave enough to do it in my own life. I'm not even saying, like, oh, it's so brave coming out, I was scared. Rather like you might be scared about something else.

[02:05:29.400] - Speaker 1
Yeah, like. Like whatever you're afraid of. I. I was afraid, and a lot of rothaniel is to my mother. And so, you know, I'm saying the thing I didn't want to say to the person whose reaction scares me the most. And, you know, I think if it's interesting, it's because of that.

[02:05:54.160] - Speaker 2
Has she watched it?

[02:05:55.440] - Speaker 1
Yes.

[02:05:56.360] - Speaker 2
Has she told you? Has she said anything?

[02:06:00.000] - Speaker 1
Uh, yes. It's almost like, uh, you know, she kind of blocked out the parts of it that, and I get that because it was hard for me to say it. So I know it must have been hard for her to hear some of it. But, uh, the initial call and subsequent calls largely ignore a lot of the parts about me feeling ignored, ironically enough. So so so and and look, it came with consequences like, you know, uh, relationships that are still being repaired because of it. I was just in Dillon, South Carolina, talking to my Uncle Joe about it and my cousin about it, and they saw it and we talked about because it's personal, it's my family and it's me and it's, you know, um, and so the one thing you know, that I would say, uh, to, to comedians is that it was very scary to me. And it's like I could say I spent my career saying all the dangerous stuff, all the things you can't say about, uh, you know, different races or sexuality even.

[02:07:26.120] - Speaker 1
I've talked about gay people and trans people in my act before, you know, I got booed at the Greek talking about the Me Too movement in its infancy, you know, all the dangerous things I did, all the dangerous things. And that wasn't truly dangerous. I knew that I, at least for me, it didn't feel truly dangerous. And but there were things in my life that I was afraid to say. And I said that thing.

[02:07:57.200] - Speaker 2
The difference is in the other, you were touching societal hot buttons. Yeah. And in this one, you're touching personal hot buttons.

[02:08:05.640] - Speaker 1
Yes. Oh, that was way scarier. Way scarier. Well, I could say something.

[02:08:11.600] - Speaker 2
About the personal hot buttons. Feel like life and death?

[02:08:15.160] - Speaker 1
Yes, yes. I'm talking. To my mother in front of God. As far as I'm concerned. Yeah.

[02:08:25.880] - Speaker 2
And HBO.

[02:08:26.680] - Speaker 1
And HBO. You know God. Um, no, but but but it was scary to me. That's all I can say about it, is that I did a thing that was, uh, frightening.

[02:08:40.640] - Speaker 2
I think that's why it's so compelling and real that the emotion is palpable, and it's real and it's not acting. And we don't get to see real emotion. So often on television. We get to see people acting. Emotion. Yeah, but we don't get to see real stakes, real personal. Whether it's real love or real fear or real, um, anything. It's all facade. It's all performance. It's all fake. And this was not fake.

[02:09:26.960] - Speaker 1
Yeah, yeah. It was, it was. I don't know. I've dedicated my life to this, so I have to give all of it. And, yeah, it makes the reward odd. I'll tell you, though, because it doesn't. You know, it was funny because. It was a probably, like, the highest that felt and the lowest that been almost at the same time. Um. It's odd. It's odd. I'm so happy for its success. And. Terrified to talk to my family and, you know, still, like, kind of healing those wounds. Um. I'm very happy I made it, but it. You know.

[02:10:29.490] - Speaker 2
That's the thing with if you really go there in art, it is life and death and all consuming and. It's, um. The stakes are high. Yeah, the stakes are high. Now, they may not be high for everybody, but they're high for you.

[02:10:48.290] - Speaker 1
Well, that's the thing.

[02:10:49.890] - Speaker 2
Also doesn't change anyone else's life.

[02:10:51.810] - Speaker 1
Well, also, where I was maybe get offended by comedian, you know, uh, who may have had some negative thing. I'm like, I've never done the same thing as the other comedians anyway. I'm like. Like like like, you know, our differences lie across the board, you know? So I, you know, I think the attention that it got attracted, you know, a lot of podcast commentary, I guess. But again, I do expect it. I do expect it. I'm not even trying to sound cool about it, but because it still isn't the most comfortable thing. But I do it. I, you know, you.

[02:11:39.770] - Speaker 2
Wouldn't take it back. No.

[02:11:42.210] - Speaker 1
Oh, God. No. That's what I'm saying. It's like. Yeah, yeah.

[02:11:45.050] - Speaker 2
Yeah. You you you committed to it and you're proud that you committed to it. And whatever happens after that, that's out of our.

[02:11:53.890] - Speaker 1
Control after it. Yeah, yeah. And you kind of, you know, just kind of let you know time is going to play things out, how it plays.

[02:12:02.930] - Speaker 2
And people's reactions usually have more to do with who they are and where they are than anything about what you're saying. Yes, you're what you're saying triggers something in them about their life that they have to confront.

[02:12:17.850] - Speaker 1
Yeah, yeah yeah, yeah, yeah. I think some comedians may have received it as an indictment of their own work. You know, um.

[02:12:34.610] - Speaker 2
I would say after watching that, it would be hard to watch someone standing on stage telling jokes and take it very seriously.

[02:12:47.690] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I mean, you know, again, it's like. It also that also could be the move. That could be the move, that could be a great I'm like like even me like like I almost could be inclined to just completely rebel against Rothaniel and go like, all right, my next one's all one liners. Yeah. Like and like, you know, it's not true to where I'm at or what I find interesting.

[02:13:14.410] - Speaker 2
But it's but it's an interesting idea.

[02:13:16.050] - Speaker 1
It's an interesting.

[02:13:16.770] - Speaker 2
Conceptually. It's like, okay, that was then and now we're going to do.

[02:13:21.290] - Speaker 1
Maybe something totally. And I do have to be open to that. I can't just stay in the pocket because I don't want to say, and I'm not there. I'm not in the same. I was in a really low place when I made Rothaniel, and it was trying to see light or make something of it. Um, I'm not in that space anymore. And if I recorded a special tomorrow, it would be totally different already. Um, and so I have to be true to that. And I still enjoy, you know, if done great, you know, I can enjoy a joke as much as the next guy. You know, I still love a good joke. Still tell. Just tell some joke. I tell some jokes at the Globes, you know? You know, some people didn't find all of them very funny.

[02:14:09.650] - Speaker 2
But I tell me, what were some of the globe jokes?

[02:14:12.530] - Speaker 1
Oh, the globe jokes. I mean, I had things that were, uh, I said, uh, they asked me, they came to my dressing room and asked me to, uh, shout out, uh, the hotel they wanted me to, like, you have to say something about the Beverly Hilton. So I said, I went on stage and said, hi. Everybody wanted me to shout out the hotel. So here we are, live from the place that killed Whitney Houston. That's funny. That's funny. To me. It's like, do you not think of the Beverly Hilton as the hotel that killed Whitney Houston? Like it's the first thing I think of as soon as I walk in the building, I'm like, what's the room number? I want to see it. I'm obsessed. I'm infatuated with it. And so I thought that was funny. Um.

[02:15:00.010] - Speaker 2
Uh, the audience didn't really respond to that.

[02:15:04.090] - Speaker 1
So they groaned, you know. You know, but that makes it worthwhile a little bit, you know? That's me being a real comedian. I did a, you know, I, I should say it because I don't want to say it now. So that means it's something there. But like the, you know, the a little joke about Will, uh, because it's like the first award, major award show since the Oscars. So, you know, obviously I have to chime in on it, and I didn't want to do it in the monolog. So I did a little joke through the ceremony there. They got some groans and I. Yeah, it's all, you know, I did jokes that, that I had written that I thought were funny. I'm like, oh, this is funny. And it was the occasion for it, you know. And then I said it, and, you know, I did my my little, uh, provocative jokes, but, you know, it's not the same as the monolog.

[02:15:58.890] - Speaker 1
The monolog meant something to me. And the jokes I didn't have to tell. I didn't need to tell them.

[02:16:04.410] - Speaker 2
But I asked you back. Would you do it again?

[02:16:10.170] - Speaker 1
My friend Ari said that I should say yes. And he always has a no, no, no, no. He says that about, like, if they asked me to do, like, the Oscars, he's like, you should do it, you know, just. But but I don't think I would do the Globes again because I did it for the same reason. I couldn't see myself doing SNL again because I did it and I really did it, you know? Like, I really gave it my all, like. There was no.

[02:16:43.330] - Speaker 2
Yeah, there's no mountain to climb. No, no, no.

[02:16:45.450] - Speaker 1
There's no reason. And I came at a at a really unique time. And and I spoke about it in the most honest way that I could. And it's over. I wouldn't want to do it again. And there could be. I only pause because, yeah, it depends on where I'm at. You never know. It could be something pressing and it could be like it was last year, where there's a confluence of things that make me motivated to do it. But but just to do it again. No, I wouldn't want to.

[02:17:24.970] - Speaker 2
Anything else you feel like we we missed?

[02:17:27.650] - Speaker 1
I don't know. I feel like we. I feel like we talked. I feel like we sound like us. Not on a podcast. That feels.

[02:17:33.330] - Speaker 2
Good. Normal?

[02:17:34.130] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[02:17:34.850] - Speaker 2
Normal conversation. What was the music in your house growing up?

[02:17:40.130] - Speaker 1
A lot of gospel. My mom. My mom, for the most part, only listens to gospel, with some Whitney Houston sprinkled in and maybe some Elton John. My dad listened to the radio a lot growing up, so it was a lot of that. And then I remember. Uh, two huge things were like in eighth grade, I like, discovered Stevie Wonder. Game changer. And got the at the close of the century box set and just listened to all of those and was like, oh, oh, he's got like, like having that. And a brother who, uh, introduced me to Jay-Z. I have a big brother who's eight years older than me, and he had great taste. So I had great taste by proxy. And he's the guy you want to introduce you to an artist because it's it's how I play Jay-Z for my boyfriend. It's like. Like what? A lot of pauses. Like, did you hear what he said? Did you talk it out? And Jay-Z is so conversational and so witty that we kind of, you know, we memorize all of his lyrics and kind of speak in Jay-Z.

[02:18:59.770] - Speaker 1
There's always a verse for everything. And and, uh, Joe loved he he bought the priority records reasonable doubt. I remember he had that cassette, um, with the original Dead Presidents and like, just loved him in, in North Carolina, you know, um, and and at a time when everyone was on Cash Money and No limit and, you know, the South had its own thing. Joe was just like such a big Jay fan, and it influenced me hugely, hugely. And when I finally got to introduce my brother to Jay, Jay J. It was like, hey, thank you. He said, thank you to my brother, which Jay's so smart. He knows how to make a moment. Everyone will remember forever. And he said, he said, thank you, uh, for him, you know, like in his dressing room before a show. Um, and Jay just being so witty and so important to, uh, to me and my view of the world, I learned so much about the world.

[02:20:09.130] - Speaker 2
The authenticity in what he's saying. It's unbelievable.

[02:20:13.330] - Speaker 1
Well, he's a big, uh, influence in that way. In the way that Jay's whole thing is. And I'm not lying. Like, all my rhymes are true, and they are. And there's, you know, he takes his liberties in storytelling here and there. But Reasonable Doubt is so autobiographical. And so it's four for four and Jay at his best, it makes his real life feel like an epic. He's so good at telling a story and it is. He finds epic about it, and he and he extracts that and and is so good at telling the truth. And I want to be really good at telling the truth.

[02:21:03.090] - Speaker 2
And and he talks about things that he's not proud of. Yes. And you can hear him talk about how he got to be in that position and the regret.

[02:21:15.690] - Speaker 1
Regret. Well, songs, regret and things that he regrets and things that aren't. Bo and I had this rule, um, when making rothaniel, um, is like, the only way that this can stand a chance at being cool is if I don't try to be cool at all. Like, I just, I, couldn't try to be cool. My friend Lionel says that about Jay-Z. Actually, he says that, like, um, any misstep with Jay is that he's so naturally cool. If he tries, it's not cool. Jay can't try to be cool because he just is cool. So he has to just be. And I and I, and I and I, I learned that trying to be cool is, I mean, just horrible for me. It's horrible for anybody. But but like but you know, especially in a situation where I felt vulnerable, it's easy to want to lean on masculinity and, and bragging and, and a certain harshness to feel safe. It's armor.

[02:22:23.930] - Speaker 1
Um, or jokes as a comedian, like this joke is how I'll stand behind this joke. Um, but I, I that was me trying to be cool. It was me swagging out. I out. I had to get rid of that. And, you know, Jay at his best is saying some uncool things. He was an emotional rapper, you know. You know, at a at a time where that wasn't the coolest thing you could.

[02:22:52.410] - Speaker 2
No. Absolutely. Great talking to you.

[02:22:58.130] - Speaker 1
Always great talking to you.

[02:22:59.290] - Speaker 2
To be continued.

[02:23:00.210] - Speaker 1
Yes. Always good. Yeah, yeah. There'll be so much I still have to tell you about my dad. Right? Yeah. It's still. It's a lot there.

[02:23:08.650] - Speaker 
And I'm. I'm figuring it out, but. Turn around. Turn around. Turn around. Turn around. Turn around.
