[00:00:07.820] - Speaker 2
Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton.

[00:00:24.010] - Speaker 1
It seems like it's easier for kids. I always remember that scene in Big, where Tom Hanks is at the FAO Schwartz, and he's just messing around. He sees another kid, and he's immediately like, My name's Billy. What's yours? That's how quickly they become friends. And sometimes wishing, sometimes meeting somebody and feel like, I feel like I'd be friends with this person, but we can't quite get through because we're We're playing these roles and we're in this situation. We're not really going to get to connect.

[00:01:09.470] - Speaker 2
I wish we could do it without talking.

[00:01:11.800] - Speaker 1
Yeah, without talking. Or I guess I also get the feeling of being judged. It's immediately a little bit of, okay, well, if any, most spiritual programs talk about being in the moment, that's the key enjoying life or feeling good. And it's hard to be in the moment if while we're talking, it can come into my mind, someone's going to listen to this later and judge it the same way I might judge something that I'm listening to. And when you get that, that's the thing that probably, when I begin this, makes me a bit inhibited always when you start, and then you probably relax and you forget about it. And it would be nice to get to a place where you don't really care.

[00:02:09.020] - Speaker 2
I've been doing this every day for the last twelve days, and today is the first time I'm nervous. But I think it's because I feel your energy.

[00:02:18.840] - Speaker 1
And that we didn't really agree to do this. No, I know. I said...

[00:02:25.740] - Speaker 2
I believe your words were no chance.

[00:02:27.750] - Speaker 1
I wasn't going to do it. And even this morning, I thought when you said, you're coming over to get me, that we were going for a walk, and then we started driving. And as soon as I realized where we were driving, I knew what was happening, that it was a little bit of a- Kidnapping. Okay, yeah, that we're going to do this. Yeah, and here we are. Here we are.

[00:02:57.430] - Speaker 2
I guess it's the same, though, in your job, when there are There's cameras there, now you're used to there being cameras. And I imagine in the beginning, when there's a camera there, it's weird that there's a camera.

[00:03:07.650] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Well, I don't know. Yeah. For some reason, I was lucky. It didn't make me nervous. I wasn't that aware of it. In fact, when I got that Lasix, when I got my eyes fixed, one of the things that I was nervous about was that I thought that, okay, because anytime I was acting, I couldn't see the expressions of the camera guy or the crew or anything. And so I felt that helped me for what we're talking about. I felt more relaxed. And when I was going to get lasings, one of the things that I was a little bit thinking about, I was like, I wonder if now being able to see people's expressions, if that's going to make it a little bit trickier for me. But it didn't make the slightest difference, even though I could, I didn't notice, I guess, because I was lucky that I was able to tune that stuff out or I just didn't notice it because I was absorbed in it.

[00:04:16.140] - Speaker 2
Do you ever perform specifically for the crew?

[00:04:21.730] - Speaker 1
I'll joke about that with Luke sometimes. Something will get a laugh from the crew, and you can't help feeling like, Okay, we did something. And then later it didn't mean anything when you see the movie, because sometimes what can get a laugh is just something that's different. Everybody's read the script a million times. So all of a sudden you say something new and just the fact that it's different or it can be a tense feeling or uncomfortable sometimes on set. Anything that breaks that tension, people look for that of release, of laughing. And you can think or it can also definitely happen. I've found the few times where the scene you're supposed to get emotional. Any time you get emotional, people, I think it's just a human instinct when you see somebody else cry a little bit to want to go over and comfort them. So somebody will come over afterwards and say, That was amazing. And you can't help thinking like, Well, that must have been pretty powerful. And then you realize everyone, it's not that. You've seen a million people cry in movies, and it doesn't necessarily mean that the scene is any better.

[00:05:43.820] - Speaker 1
It really comes down to, right? Just if the situation in a scene connects with people in an emotional way. Like in Marley and me, I remember talking talking to Josh afterwards, and he said it was like a horror movie for him seeing the dog at the end, getting put down. And so that's a scene that everyone feels. So, yeah, people get emotional. And it wasn't hard for me to get emotional in that either.

[00:06:25.220] - Speaker 2
How has your relationship to doing it changed from bottle rocket to now?

[00:06:32.080] - Speaker 1
I don't know that it has changed that much. I remember on Bottle Rocket, they show dailies. When you're making a movie, then to make sure stuff's in focus, or the crew or the heads of the department will watch stuff. And so I wasn't aware of this because Bottled Rocket was the first movie, but I was aware because that they did the dailies because the next day, David Wasco, who was the production designer, and a couple other people said, That was great, the stuff. And I could tell by their energy that they felt we were doing a good job. And that gave me a lot of confidence to continue. But back to that the thing with the Lasix, even though I'm not a nervous public speaker, I was not ever nervous doing that stuff.

[00:07:34.120] - Speaker 2
You think because you were doing it with friends?

[00:07:37.240] - Speaker 1
I think, I'm sure that helped, but I think I've certainly done it a lot of times with people that I didn't know as well as I knew, Wes and Luke and everybody. It's feeling a little bit... I'm in control. I guess that's what it is because I know So you know the script, and you know how, in my mind, how the scene is going to feel. So I feel like I'm in control of it and feel free enough to also come up with different things.

[00:08:23.510] - Speaker 2
So you think if there was no script, it would be much harder to do?

[00:08:27.540] - Speaker 1
Oh, yeah, for sure. That's why I think to do one of those improv type things. People will say, Oh, you improvise a lot. I very rarely will just in the spot come up with something that never occurred to me. Sometimes you do, but most of the time it's something that you've thought of before. Like, this line could work or this could maybe be something good, a good direction for the scene to go in. Yeah.

[00:09:05.480] - Speaker 2
When you're reading a script in the beginning, are you right away thinking about potential lines? Like, the lines come right from the beginning, or is it more once you're involved in the project?

[00:09:22.110] - Speaker 1
Well, I really don't judge a script based on the words on the page, per se. It's more the feel, the weight of it. But no, the... Well, when you asked that question, it made me think of... A lot of times I don't read scripts that I think are that good that I could still end up working on. It's very rare that I've read a script that I think I can read a book from start to finish and think it's great. So most of the time it's like, Yeah, maybe that could work or this. But I think the fact that I don't think it's necessarily that great gives me confidence, I can maybe make this better. I have ideas. It's a little bit like sometimes I felt I did better with teachers in school that I wasn't intimidated by. There would be a teacher that everybody loved or was scared of and had a real history with the school. And I could get nervous and inhibited around that teacher and not really be myself, which in a way is why sometimes I did Letterman maybe a couple of times, but I just got too nervous, even though he was always really, I always did fine.

[00:10:59.970] - Speaker 1
But it was less stressful to go on another talk show, maybe just because I admired him.

[00:11:10.710] - Speaker 2
Yeah, it sounds like for you, less stress works. I know for some people, it's the exact opposite, which is odd because I'm much more like you as well. I like knowing that the stakes are low, we're having fun, whatever happens, it's all good. Then when something good happens, you're pleasantly I'm surprised. But there are some people who like the feeling like this is the big day, and it's all on the line today, and I have to show up for the team today Today is that it's game day, which is a very different headspace. I can't imagine it.

[00:11:52.500] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Even as you're saying it, the times where they'll maybe be a scene looming zooming in something or even meeting somebody where you've put a lot of thought into it and you've really worked it over in your mind. And I find I don't do well when I've done that, that I feel constricted, and I do much better when I just not have a feeling of not caring But yeah, where the stakes aren't that big one way or the other. I do better definitely like that. I just feel looser.

[00:12:40.430] - Speaker 2
It's one of the things I've noticed watching movies you've been in is when it seems like the actors around you really care about it and you don't. It really works.

[00:12:53.650] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I mean, even when you were describing that, everyone being real into it, part of me starts to go the other way. And yeah, I don't know why that is. Maybe just resisting having it seem too obvious, I guess. If everyone's expecting it to be this way, I find something in me, resist wanting to do it that way. Yeah.

[00:13:32.110] - Speaker 2
So, yeah, the- Have you ever been in a scene with someone where the acting is so good that on their part, that you believe it's happening? Can you get lost in the moment?

[00:13:43.380] - Speaker 1
Yeah, definitely. I think you can get lost in the moment, not where you feel... I remember reading an interview with Forrest Whitaker where they asked him about who's the best actor you've ever worked with or the best acting you've ever seen. And he said, Well, I don't know. This person's the best actor that I've ever worked with. But one of the most memorable things was when I was working with Mickey Rourke And he was talking about this movie where he plays a plastic surgeon, and Mickey Rourke is disfigured and is sent to see him, and he reconstructs his face. So he looks all of a sudden, he comes out, and he's now like Mickey Rourke. I think the movie is called Johnny Handsome. But anyway, they come out of the hospital, and Forrest Whitaker is going to say goodbye to Mickey Rourke, and Mickey Rourke had a page of dialog saying how meaningful this is what the doctor had done for him, now that he can step into the world and not look like a freak and how grateful he is and all these things like that. And Forrest Whitaker said they yelled action, and they come out and Mickey looks at him, and he didn't say anything.

[00:15:20.170] - Speaker 1
But Forrest Whitaker said, I heard every single line from the script that he was supposed to say. He didn't say anything. He just looked at me, and that was really incredible. And the way he told that story or me reading the story, that always sticks in my mind where I almost feel like I've experienced that, too. But I think that's the great thing about a great story like that. You do feel it. So I can imagine that, that somebody could do something in an original way like that. And I completely believe that happened. And that seems great.

[00:16:05.660] - Speaker 2
Yeah. I just read Quentin Tarantino's new book, and he talks about Steve McQueen and how he would just go through scripts and cross out all of his own lines. And just what's the very least he could say? Yeah. And it seemed like the less he said, the more believable it was.

[00:16:24.030] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I know that when I think when they were getting him to do the Magnificent Seven, the big role was Yule Brenner. But they said to Steve McQueen, the director, don't worry, we're going to give you the camera. You're not going to have a lot of lines. You do watch that movie, and I guess it started to irritate Yule Brenner. But any time he's delivering one of his soliloquies, Steve McQueen would be loading his gun or looking at it, doing some business. And yeah, I don't get that at all. Sometimes that's a cliché, you'll hear about actors counting their lines or threatened if some lines get cut. And I feel like I'm always pretty happy to have less lines. But But also talking about that, that made me think of this great story in the John Ford documentary that Peter Bogdanovic did, where John Ford is doing a Western, and he's doing a scene with Richard Widmark and Jimmy Stewart. And neither of those guys had ever worked together. Here's their first day, and they're doing a big scene sitting by the side of the river. Right before the scene, Jimmy Stuart said that John Ford came up to him and he's like, Watch Widmark.

[00:18:11.660] - Speaker 1
He knows every trick in the book. And Then, apparently, John Ford had gone to Richard Widmark and say, be careful with Stuart. He's a good country actor. So both of those guysBe careful. Had that. And then When they show the scene in the movie. I've never seen the movie. I've just seen this scene, and it's one of the greatest scenes ever because you feel like it plays in one shot, and you see all of that happening. When Widmark starts talking, Jimmy Stewart is rolling a cigarette. When Jimmy Stewart starts to say something, Widmark's doing something. And by the end of the scene, they're smiling at each other like, Look at this old boy. What's he up to? And that's exactly what the was supposed to be, and it's just incredible.

[00:19:03.640] - Speaker 2
That idea of having bits of business to do. When you're acting, you're not just standing there, you're doing something because as people, we do stuff all the time. And inconsequential actions. If you do that, you've been doing this for a long time, does it ever bleed over into life where now you find yourself doing inconsequential actions because that's what you do it so much in work? Does it ever bleed out into life?

[00:19:39.350] - Speaker 1
Yeah, because a lot of conversations in real life are fake. So So whether it's something just to entertain yourself in the scene that you're doing, you might be doing something. And then every once in a while, you'll come across a person that they get Like the Richard Widmark, Jimmy Stuart, where it's the person like, okay, he's doing a bit, and they get a kick out of it, or you see what they're doing. And that can be the basis for a friendship, or certainly someone- You could have a whole another storyline going on in real life in addition to what's on the surface. I feel like I do a lot of times. I've given that example that I sometimes feel like it's like invisible ink, and that I'm talking a lot in life, and I'm saying the stuff to people that works in the scene of this. But if that person happens to have that pen and is able to draw it, they can pick up some of this other stuff and get a kick out of it. So it can work in both ways. And then also I'll sometimes see that with somebody else. It's almost like a feeling that you get from a person that it's all like...

[00:21:11.000] - Speaker 1
It's all mate believe. Believe, or that it's all a little bit, sometimes an act. Or maybe that it's... I saw now, you'll see sometimes bumper sticker or a sticker on somebody's water bottle. Relax, it's just a dream. I don't want to make it sound like nothing means anything, but the idea that I think that can be a nice idea, the idea that it isn't so important.

[00:21:49.170] - Speaker 2
Yeah, we're not so serious, not to take anything so seriously. The thing he said before about after the first day shooting at Bottle Rocket and hearing about the result of seeing the dailies. The person who came, you said they had this energy about them. That's an interesting thing to talk about because energy feels authentic. Do you know what I mean? You can hear people who say words that are the words that they think you want to hear. It's completely different than when someone comes in with good energy.

[00:22:29.320] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Because I still remember the way David Wasco looked when he came up to me in the lobby of the hotel that day. I just believed him when he said it seemed really great what he had seen, and it's going to work. You could feel it. It's funny. I know My dad was in advertising, and so I'm definitely, if somebody asked me about something that they've worked on, I'm going to... If it's too late to change it, I'm going to try just to be like, I think it was great. I think you did a good job. I'm going to try to make the person feel good. And there are people, you're maybe a bit more like this, where you won't really try to sell the person on that they did well. And I think most people are a bit more like, Yeah, that was great. But it's nice when you can really, of course, believe when the person did do great. And then there's some people that probably just have an energy that's, whether it's convincing or not, it just feels good, and you just don't mind hearing what they have to say.

[00:24:00.720] - Speaker 2
How different is it working with different directors? You work with so many different directors. How different is the experience from director to director?

[00:24:11.750] - Speaker 1
It's not that different, I find. And it's not that different even on a commercial. It ends up being the same feeling where you're both trying to come up with something good and And I find that the few times in my life that I have not had a good time doing something is because, and it's only happened a couple of times, is because I have not been able to get to the place where I've been able to hypnotize myself into thinking this is good. And when I've gone a whole thing, never getting to that place, that's really discouraging. And that means you're going to work every day or you're just feeling like, that doesn't work. And that's a terrible feeling because when you're there, you want it to work or I do. And It's usually that feeling that you're looking for their expression, like I got from David Wasco that day of energized or enjoying something or moved and you feel it also. Usually, and obviously, I've worked on a million things that didn't work out. But in the moment when we were doing it, we thought we were, this could be pretty good.

[00:25:46.950] - Speaker 2
Is it difficult to memorize lines?

[00:25:50.200] - Speaker 1
It's funny. That's something that I always find people, you know. Sometimes people say, I could never do what you do. And I'm always thinking, I'm sure you could do it very easily. And they'll always say, I don't even know how you memorize the lines. Well, first of all, you're maybe doing a page or two pages or three pages a day. So that's very easy. It's not like a play where you've got the whole thing memorized. And it's not like you're memorizing gibberish, a sequence of numbers. You're memorizing the way something's going to go. You're going to ask me, did you see the lifeguard stand down near the point? And I'm going to say, Yeah, it was weird. You could tell that the waves had come up almost. It's going to be a conversation that should make sense in your mind. Otherwise, you're not going to be able to do it anyway. And if it doesn't make sense, then you got to talk to somebody about figuring out why it doesn't make sense so they can explain it to you because you got to have it make sense in your mind what you're saying. Every single thing that you're saying has got to, okay, yeah, I know why I'm saying this or why I'm asking that.

[00:27:12.510] - Speaker 1
So it ends up being a little bit You're just telling the story. Yeah, it's pretty easy. And if you know the way the story goes, even if you don't get the exact line, you know what's going to wear the story where you got to get to. So you hopefully can say something to edge it along.

[00:27:34.950] - Speaker 2
It's a funny example you gave of the water coming up over the lifeguard stand because I remember you and I body surfing, it was probably 20 years ago, in Manhattan Beach, and the waves were big that day. And I remember we were out there, and the last thing that you said to me was because the waves were starting to come over the pier. They were really big. The last thing you said to me, if the waves keep building, I think we're going to be in trouble. And then you were gone.

[00:28:13.050] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I Yeah, that was over at Venice?

[00:28:19.340] - Speaker 2
No, Manhattan Beach, I think. Further south. Because it was the Manhattan Beach pier.

[00:28:24.160] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[00:28:25.400] - Speaker 2
Or is it Venice? Is it the Venice pier?

[00:28:27.610] - Speaker 1
Yeah, that's the Venice. We're Washington Washington runs in.

[00:28:32.460] - Speaker 2
It was terrifying.

[00:28:33.560] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Well, that's also, if you've swum in the ocean much, you do sometimes get, especially in Hawaii, but even out here, that feeling where everything's good, everything's nice, and then it's not, and you can get scared. And I know they always say, the big thing is don't panic. That uses a lot of oxygen. But as soon as you get scared, you panic. I don't know how you can contain that. I had that happening, the inner dialog, because I was being drowned, being held under by the waves.

[00:29:19.590] - Speaker 2
I couldn't breathe, and I'm panicking. The conversation I'm having with myself is no reason to panic. Panicking is bad. Panicking is just going to use up oxygen, and I'm drowning. And as I'm drowning, I'm panicking. You can't turn it off, really.

[00:29:38.090] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Yeah, I know. Where was that?

[00:29:45.460] - Speaker 2
That same day.

[00:29:47.390] - Speaker 1
That same day? Yeah.

[00:29:49.850] - Speaker 2
God. That same day, I got held under. I don't know if we even ever talked about it. I was right in the drop zone of the big waves, and I was completely trapped, and I got held under and then washing machined. Then as soon as I came up for a breath, I hit within another giant wave.

[00:30:07.420] - Speaker 1
I thought you were waving, but you were drowning. I was looking out and I was waving with both hands back at you. I thought, Oh, there's Rick just larking about.

[00:30:24.690] - Speaker 2
It was the worst. I remember crawling onto the sand eventually and just laying there out of breath. And eventually, a lifeguard came over to me. There was nobody on the beach that day, and a lifeguard eventually came over. It's like, My friend, I think he's out there. And I'm like, No, he was smart enough to swim out and swim around. He's fine. It's like, Thanks.

[00:30:47.290] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Well, I've had that feeling. Yeah, the first time I went to Hawaii, it was Kauai, and probably 28, and getting caught in the surf or couldn't get back in and my friend running along the beach, and he was having to sprint to keep up with how fast it was pulling me down. And it wouldn't let me out past where the waves were breaking or where I could get my feet down. And I just felt like I'm drowning. It's so scary. It's so scary. And I remember getting where I was like, I just don't have any more energy to keep going under the waves, holding my breath, and I'm just going to let it hit me. And I I barely got my feet touched and then pulled me out again. But I was able to get in, and there were two local guys that came running down. I remember them saying, Bro, there's people way stupider than you that have drowned on this beach this year. They said something like that. But I remember just sitting on the sand before they got to me, and it was almost like, not quite crying, but it was like an emotional feeling of just being spent and feeling that you came close.

[00:32:09.170] - Speaker 1
And yeah, so we both have had these experiences of felt scared, like, oh, whether we really were close to actually drowning. I don't know, but it felt like I felt like I could have, and you were shaken And that certainly didn't keep me from swimming in the ocean, probably the next day.

[00:32:36.450] - Speaker 2
Yeah, same.

[00:32:37.710] - Speaker 1
I also got hit in the face with a surfboard, and my nose was all bloody.

[00:32:43.680] - Speaker 2
I've had a bunch of stuff happen in the ocean, but I just love it.

[00:32:47.320] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I had a board hit me in Maui, and it was my own board where I jumped off the back of the wave and went under. When I came back, my board had blown up in the air. It was blowing so hard and came down just as I was coming up, and I had to get a bunch of stitches. But right. But that you would think like, Oh, that might keep somebody from doing something. But Yeah. I just love it. And also even my older brother being bit by a shark right in front of-I didn't know that.

[00:33:29.090] - Speaker 2
When did that happen?

[00:33:30.030] - Speaker 1
Andrew got bit by a 6-foot black-tipped reef shark. And he's in the database for shark attacks. That's right in front of where I live there on Howey, and he doesn't swim out there anymore. He still swims in the ocean, but he doesn't go out there. But I still go out there. I also feel, now, whether I would feel this in the moment, hopefully I could get to a place, if you ever did get in a situation where you're like, oh, that's it. I do have that feeling of I love the ocean so much that If that was my karma, which I don't think it is, but that's where I'm going to... That'll be it for me. I'm okay with that.

[00:34:29.690] - Speaker 2
And Remember the night that you came over, like 2:00 in the morning after seeing the luminescence for the first time?

[00:34:41.070] - Speaker 1
Yeah, exactly. We're trying to figure out, how could... We're wondering, thinking that it's funny to continue doing something that you've had maybe a near-death experience. But now we're bringing up something that, well, that's exactly why. Because one time I went swimming and I'd never heard about these phosphorescence in the water. I go down for what I think is just a... I'm just going to jump in the water. It's nighttime. I jump in and all of a sudden it's lighting up.

[00:35:20.680] - Speaker 2
It's in the middle of the night in the dark, the whole ocean is lighting up with every wave.

[00:35:24.980] - Speaker 1
No, not with every wave. Every time I'd move my arms, every time I open my eyes, And just when I swim, it lights up underwater and never heard of it. No one had ever told me about it. So then I came up afterwards and I looked like, I'm sure, like somebody almost possessed or that had seen God. It just seemed like an unbelievable miracle I had experienced. And then Yeah, I found out that I guess that can happen sometimes in the water where there's phosphorescence light up. But if you've never experienced that, it is, I think, one of the most incredible things.

[00:36:17.900] - Speaker 2
I think not knowing about it was the best part of your experience, because when I told you what it was, you were not happy.

[00:36:23.970] - Speaker 1
Well, it was a little bit like, yeah, I thought I had experienced a miracle, and you were saying, Well, no, let me show you how this trick is done. It's this. It's a little bit of...

[00:36:37.040] - Speaker 2
Dumping water on it.

[00:36:38.460] - Speaker 1
Yeah, letting the air out the balloon. I think it's probably also I'm not somebody that when somebody does a magic trick where I want to figure it out, I have zero interest in figuring out. I want it to feel like magic and to feel incredible. And that's what I want to go with. I don't want to later, How do you think he did that? That doesn't interest me.

[00:37:14.060] - Speaker 2
It's so much better not to know. Yeah. Feeling the mystery.

[00:37:18.070] - Speaker 1
But also, phosphorescence. So that's something incredible that you can experience in nature. And I feel like even though I grew up in the suburbs in Dallas, a lot of being a kid was riding your bike around the neighborhood, going down to the creek, just looking around for adventure, mischief or something exciting. And your whole life is the daytime. And then as you become a teenager, you start to see the mystery and the excitement of night, and you enter into that. And Ford, my 12 I was dropping him off for this Halloween thing at his school, and it was in the evening. And I walked him in and his friends were running around and the girls were there and they're starting to have crushes and stuff, and you could feel this energy, and it was like, okay, he's entering into... That the night can be unbelievable. And I feel now I'm coming out of the night. I spent a long time in the night, and now I'm going back more towards... It's a little bit like when you're a kid where I like being up early in the morning, which I never liked. It also gives me a good feeling that it's great being back in the day and being into that.

[00:38:55.620] - Speaker 2
It's great. Yeah. Same as you from the time that I was making choices on my own, I lived in the night. Yeah. That switch to waking up in the morning and changing my hours has been the greatest change of all in my life.

[00:39:13.940] - Speaker 1
No one could have told you that. When we first became friends, you'd stay up till four or five, and you'd sleep till one. It was about trying to sleep is through as much of the day so you could get back to the night as you could. And I could have-Light it up all night and never go to sleep. Yeah, exactly. And I could have, or someone could have said, Oh, you're missing, because I even remember people saying, yeah, if you don't get up in the morning, you're missing the best part of the day. Just no way you could get me to believe that. And I don't know. Then all of a sudden it just flips again. Are we even the same people? Are we even the same? Yeah, I guess because I feel like it's a little bit of a return to how, in my case, I was as a kid, where I feel I did notice nature. Like, as a kid, you're just more, you're taking things in and you pay more attention to stuff. And you're just Because I think you're really looking at your neighborhood. You're trying to figure it out. You're trying to figure it out, and you're looking for some adventure or something fun to do.

[00:40:41.100] - Speaker 1
So everything you're looking at, you're looking at, okay, could that be an I've had an opportunity to do something like climb that tree, and I wonder if we could tie a rope to this tree. And what about the bluffs here over this creek? I wonder if we could climb up. You're just looking or even just going down alleys and stuff, looking for stuff. And then now I notice a lot just walking the dog in the morning. It's like, I've lived in this for over 25 years, and I'm just now noticing some of these trees in the neighborhood. Now, you could take that as a sad story. God, he's lived here so long. He's never seen it. I don't take it that way. I take it as an exciting thing. How much other great stuff have I been missing that's out there that I'm going to start discovering or seeing? Because, of course, that's one of the best feelings you can have is that you saw something great and the idea that there's more great things to see.

[00:41:50.960] - Speaker 2
There's something really great about it, always being there and being right under your nose the whole time and discovering it. You just found something thing. It's so cool because the fact that it's been there makes it much more interesting. Right.

[00:42:05.910] - Speaker 1
I also have this app, this picture, this. It'll tell you what the tree is and stuff. That's gotten me a little bit more. I'll try to get the names. But I was thinking about a tree down the street from me that I found out since is called a Pearl Acacia. But it is the The greatest tree that I've ever seen. It was blooming these... I don't even want to try to describe it. It's just great the way it looks. It was a little bit silver the tree. But without getting too cosmic, when I first saw it, it was moving. I was like, this tree is incredible. It made me think then and probably now, as I'm telling it, there's that E. B. White story, the second tree from the corner, where the story begins where the guy's talking with his therapist and the therapist says, well, what do you want? What makes you happy? The guy's like, I don't know. I guess no one really knows. The doctor's like, well, of course people know. For me, I want to build, I'm building an extension to my house. And then the patient feels a little bit insecure that he can't really say.

[00:43:39.270] - Speaker 1
And then later when he's walking home, he sees this tree and the way it's lit by the street light, and it's a great description in the story, it looks so perfect and beautiful. He realizes that's what he wants, the second tree from the corner, and that he's glad that he can't really explain to someone what it is he wants or what would make him happy. I always like that story. But seeing that tree, I could definitely feel that. That tree is incredible, and it's great to be standing here appreciating it. I'm so happy that I found it. And this is also about talking about trees that Luke was telling me about reading about decouning in I guess maybe in his biography, he was going to be honored back in the Netherlands, and he had left when he was young, didn't feel he fit in, and he's going to be returning to get some award. And he was a little bit nervous because he hadn't felt that he really fit in when he lived there and was talking to his brother saying, I don't know how I feel about coming back. I don't feel that people really got me.

[00:45:14.440] - Speaker 1
From there. And I mean, I'm odd. Do they understand that I'm strange? I talk to trees, and I really like that story because-So cool. Yeah, because you can... I haven't gotten to the point of talking to the trees, but I could see that maybe next year.

[00:45:37.860] - Speaker 2
Isn't it great when you're walking down or you're walking through a forest, and there are many trees around, how certain trees, just like, I'm not going to say they talk to you, but they call attention to themselves in a way that this tree is different than all the other trees. It pulls you in like the tree that you just described.

[00:46:03.030] - Speaker 1
Yeah. It's like, really, yeah, it is this old boy here. He's really...

[00:46:12.270] - Speaker 2
In Costa Rica, there are these big, huge trees that are covered in spikes. I've never seen a big tree covered in spikes before, and they're everywhere.

[00:46:24.640] - Speaker 1
Yeah. What do you mean, spikes?

[00:46:27.030] - Speaker 2
Almost like what would on a rosebush, except all right next to each other, all over the tree, and a big tree, like a big oak tree.

[00:46:39.860] - Speaker 1
So you're not going to climb it?

[00:46:41.340] - Speaker 2
No, you can't. It's covered in spikes.

[00:46:43.390] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[00:46:44.190] - Speaker 2
Maybe that's why. Maybe it's a protection for animals not to get it.

[00:46:49.700] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I remember being in India, and I was like, you don't see any real vegetation because everything gets used up as It's like a resource for something. The only stuff it seems like that would still be standing would have to have incredible spikes on it. It's interesting. It's a way to protect it. But Yeah, I still sometimes will look at trees in terms of, yeah, would that be a good climbing tree?

[00:47:27.770] - Speaker 2
I remember when I was in in school studying art and seeing French impressionist paintings and the way the trees looked in the paintings, where it was a series of colors. There'd be a brown background, but then there'd be a big splash of yellow, and there'd be a big splash of more of a mustard or a big splash of orange. I was thinking at the time, living in New York and seeing those trees in the paintings, that, oh, that's part of the abstraction is making these blotches of color give an impression of what trees look like, but it's not accurate to the tree. That's part of this style of art. I thought that until I went to the south of France, and I saw the trees with the blotches on them in person. It's like, Oh, they're actually exactly... It's like a photograph of these trees. But because I'd never seen a tree like that in real life, I thought it was a poetic painting.

[00:48:36.660] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I didn't realize you... Did you major in art?

[00:48:43.390] - Speaker 2
I was a film and television major, but I took a lot of art classes.

[00:48:47.470] - Speaker 1
But I do remember that... Was it your mom's sister was the one who would take you to museums and that. It's funny, what do you think it is about art that does make people feel a little bit nervous to talk about it? I guess because you don't want to sound pretentious. That's it. But it's too bad that we have that feeling, but it can be pretty strong. I guess also the idea that you don't know necessarily what you're talking about. And so that can inhibit.

[00:49:39.320] - Speaker 2
Why would it be any different than talking about a tree?

[00:49:42.540] - Speaker 1
I don't know. I think people feel that there's Their street cred as a culturally literate person is on the line in a way with paintings that doesn't happen with trees. But it shouldn't be. I'm just saying that just something that happens, it's a great feeling to fight through and not to have, just to be able to walk in a museum and I'm as equipped as anybody to talk about this painting, or not talk about it, but appreciate it or have a reaction to it.

[00:50:24.010] - Speaker 2
I can't remember if I ever told you this story, but I did this thing in New York where we brought a whole bunch of people that I was working with in music to MoMA. I remember it was a lot I have people in their 20s, and there were hundreds on the staff of this company, and we all went to MoMA. I thought people who were working in music to reengage with fine art would be a good thing. It'd be a good thing for everybody to just tune into that. I remember the feeling of blankness on the faces of a lot of the people and feeling like, Oh, wow, this was really maybe not a good idea. I got on an elevator with one of the people who seemed completely bored. We get on the elevator and we're riding, and he looked at me and he said, I really want to thank you for setting this up. I haven't been in the museum since I was 12 years old, and it's amazing. And I'm going to bring my whole family back this weekend. It's blowing my mind. And I just read it completely wrong because they had this blank look on their face.

[00:51:52.020] - Speaker 1
I put that that you completely misread that person. And that's like not having noticed the tree down the street. I think that's a good thing to keep in mind is that you can sometimes completely misread things, and it's not the maybe negative take you have on it. In that case, I had something where I was working on a movie and in the scene, my character is with his wife and we're these this white trash couple. We're going to go in with stolen some money, and now we're going into the mall to buy some stuff, and we're going to buy ridiculous things. And the director is pitching lines, and he pitches, Yeah, you can say, we're going to, honey, we're going to buy, we're going to get you some braces to fix those horse teeth of yours. And when he said it, I felt terrible because the actress playing my wife in the scene, she did have her teeth did look a bit slightly off. And I was so embarrassed. And I could feel her flinch when he said that. Of course, I didn't say it in the scene. And then afterwards, and the guy, the director is a really nice guy, but I went up to him afterwards and I said, You know, please don't ever put me in a position like that of saying something.

[00:53:40.050] - Speaker 1
I'm not going to say something to someone Insulting. Kind of mean like that. You might think it's funny, but I don't. And even for these characters. And he was like, Oh, yes, yeah, I understand completely. I'm so sorry. Do you know those her fake teeth that we put on her. And I didn't know that she had fake teeth that they had put on. I see. And so when I imagined her flinching, that's what it was. I was imagining that. If that does happen with us, that might be a nice way you can, when you do have the feeling, Oh, somebody doesn't like this or somebody, then you It could be wrong. You could be completely wrong about it. If you could be completely wrong, why not go with the good story? Yeah.

[00:54:40.600] - Speaker 2
We never know. We never know what anyone else is thinking. Yeah.

[00:54:45.120] - Speaker 1
Yeah, but I have a tendency to go more thinking. We don't know.

[00:54:57.500] - Speaker 2
The story about the The extension on the house. It's interesting because in the Clint Eastwood movie Unforgiven, his foil, I can't remember the name of the character who's playing against Clint. But it's Jean Hackman's character, and Clint's about to kill him, and he's like, But I was building an extension on my house. Do you know how we can get...

[00:55:31.750] - Speaker 1
He says that? Yes. I thought he says this isn't fair. And he's like, fairs got nothing to do with it.

[00:55:37.310] - Speaker 2
That's part of it, too.

[00:55:38.720] - Speaker 1
But he says, But I'm building an extension. That we get so obsessed with the things that we're doing that here in this life and death situation. Yeah, right.

[00:55:53.700] - Speaker 2
It's like, no, it doesn't make sense. I'm still doing this other thing.

[00:55:58.780] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[00:55:59.790] - Speaker 2
So I'm sure whoever wrote the script got it from the E. B. White story.

[00:56:03.960] - Speaker 1
I wonder. Yeah.

[00:56:06.120] - Speaker 2
It's two on the nose.

[00:56:07.820] - Speaker 1
Are you sure it's that?

[00:56:09.250] - Speaker 2
It's an extension on... Because as soon as you said extension on the house, I know that reference. Yeah.

[00:56:16.650] - Speaker 1
That's not what it's about with the E.

[00:56:19.210] - Speaker 2
B. White story. But in both cases, it represents something like a small material action that seems important versus a bigger cosmic question.

[00:56:32.200] - Speaker 1
Yeah. When you misspoke there for a second and said Cliff, you think about Clint Eastwood, because I know you've said that before, that can you believe that Clint Eastwood walks this Earth? It's unbelievable. That guy from High Plains Drifter and Dirty Hair, all those movies. But then trying to think of, would he be the same person if that was his first name, Cliff? It is hard to imagine that being the same person, which makes me think that I'd run into Steve Coogon, and Steve Coogan had just finished playing a role. And he said that day, it had been a fight scene, and he'd said, the person, please don't hit me. And I was trying to imagine Clint Eastwood ever saying that in a movie, Please don't hit me. I can't really imagine that.

[00:57:37.590] - Speaker 2
That's more of a Rick Flair line.

[00:57:39.650] - Speaker 1
I know. It's such a cowardly thing to say. I can certainly imagine one of my characters that I played saying, Please don't hit me. But you can't imagine Clint Eastwood saying it. And in fact, when you have Paul Newman say a version of that in Cool Hand Luke, it's a heartbreaking thing because it shows they've broken him when they do that stuff, or they just keep him up for days and digging a hole and then put the What's your dirt doing? And boss, get that dirt back out. And then finally, it's like, please don't hit me anymore. Please. And it's just heartbreaking to see somebody broken. But I had that feeling with...

[00:58:35.440] - Speaker 2
I went through a phase where I thought it'd be fun to learn to ride a horse. I went with a friend's girlfriend who you know a long time ago, 25 years ago, who was really into horses. I went with her to the stable where she rode, and one of the horses escaped. One of the handlers was grabbed the escaped horse, and he was whipping the horse. I started thinking about the whole idea of breaking horses, and I decided I didn't want to ride. It was too much. It was too much.

[00:59:14.520] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I don't even like sometimes when people will say, Oh, you got your dog. Obedience school or learn. I don't really want my dog heel. Those sorts of commands I don't really love when I see somebody with their dog, even if it is incredibly well-trained, I don't love seeing heel. And I would rather teach them something else or have them. Yeah, I just don't... Yeah, that's not something I want to see. Yeah.

[01:00:03.560] - Speaker 2
The other side of it, though, is we see from exercising that having the discipline in a practice really feels good, even though it's the doing of it, we don't necessarily look forward to the doing of it all the time, but what we get from the discipline of doing it feels really good.

[01:00:30.440] - Speaker 1
Yeah. And maybe also to a dog, they do sometimes want to learn something and want to, or maybe everyone want to accomplish something. And I'm thinking also, somehow I started thinking about, well, with my parents, it was... We were big on manners, and then I try to do the same Same thing with my kids. Well, I think that's a good thing, though, having good manners. But there is an element to being a kid that I always remember in Last Tangle in Paris, in that scene where Marlon Brando is with the girl and they're just laying around, and she's saying, And clearly, his response, I think, must have just not been scripted. But she's talking about how beautiful and innocent it is being a child, which, of course, as an adult, you look back on in that way, which isn't necessarily true. And so she says that thing that everyone just accepts. Yeah, beautiful being an innocent child. But Brando says, Is it? And he goes, And she goes, yes, it's so wonderful. He goes, is it beautiful to be made into a tattle tale or be forced to admire authority? And there's a big element of being a kid that's that.

[01:02:13.670] - Speaker 1
Certainly Certainly with school and stuff. It's probably us talking about breaking horses and that there is an element of that. And so, yeah, making, breaking everybody down, so they'll conform.

[01:02:34.480] - Speaker 2
How do you feel like your life would have been different if you never would have gone to any school?

[01:02:39.560] - Speaker 1
I think that... I don't think that school is so important for what you learn because obviously it doesn't really stick with us. Or certainly, I don't remember anything from geometry, cosine, that type of stuff. You're not going I'm trying to remember. I think what is really good, the school I went to in Dallas, I was around smart kids and funny kids, and I think that is very valuable. And they're just reading good books and stuff. So I think maybe not getting great grades is so important, and that maybe just because I didn't. But I think there is something The social aspect. Yeah, being around because it goes back to making connections. So just being in some place where you can connect with people, I think, is important. And so however that is or wherever that is, then I think that's good.

[01:03:54.180] - Speaker 2
Did you have a lot of friends at school, or was it more like one or two?

[01:03:58.350] - Speaker 1
I had a lot of friends as a little kid and then into school. And then in college, it was more just a few. But I think that might also be what we talked about earlier, it's easier to make friends when you're little, you're more open. And then I don't know what happens, but as you get older, you get a little bit more blocked off, or you have your friends. Judgmental, maybe. Yeah. And you're... You just don't maybe extend yourself or other people don't in that way.

[01:04:43.790] - Speaker 2
What did you study in school?

[01:04:48.340] - Speaker 1
I was a English major in college, and I was reading something recently about how that's like dying out that major. There's an article about how it's dropped like 50 %, and they're even getting rid of it. And that everyone, I don't know, doing business and stuff.

[01:05:12.410] - Speaker 2
It seemed like it served you well, though, like literature.

[01:05:16.480] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I don't know. I really feel that the stuff that I learned, the books, I learned it. It almost seems like by junior year. I don't really remember. I didn't have a great class in college with a teacher that had a big impact on me. I did when I was younger, but I don't know that I picked up that much in college.

[01:05:51.660] - Speaker 2
That's an interesting thing, the whole hit or miss teacher. If you happen to be lucky to have one great teacher, it changes It's everything.

[01:06:00.980] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[01:06:01.880] - Speaker 2
And so many of them we don't get so much from.

[01:06:06.540] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I think it's just like anything. It's like, go to the library or a bookstore. How many books are you going to pick up that you love or TV shows or movies that you're really going to connect with. And so, yeah, there aren't that many great teachers, just like there's maybe not that many great be anything really great. And then also, you can't maybe lay it all on the teacher. Sometimes it's where you are. You're not necessarily going to be open or responding to somebody But and there's back to that that brando thing. There's an element of school that's about being forced to admire authority. Following rules. Yeah. You can see as ridiculous or that you can butt heads against. I think Sometimes, yeah, emotional intelligence is not going to be rewarded in school the same way a kid who's like, Okay, so you want me to do the problems like this, this, and this, and then handed in. That kid is going to do better than a kid that's...

[01:07:39.270] - Speaker 2
Yeah, parroting back.

[01:07:40.720] - Speaker 1
Yeah, parroting back. Then the kid who is going to give a colorful answer to a banal question, touching off laughter among the other students. That kid is not going to be beloved by teachers.

[01:08:03.330] - Speaker 2
It sounds like the introduction to your autobiography.

[01:08:07.120] - Speaker 1
Well, I was just thinking of a kid that the history teacher also taught was the baseball coach. This is maybe in seventh grade when he'd turn around to write something on the chalkboard. This kid Chris would stand up and do like a little dance. The teacher would turn around real fast and just caught him this one time as he's sitting back down. The teacher's like, Well, Mr. Kaiser, that's two strikes on you. Do you know what happens next? Chris said, I don't know, sir. I don't follow baseball.

[01:08:58.250] - Speaker 2
Great line.

[01:08:59.830] - Speaker 1
I know. And Mr. Bachelor exploded.

[01:09:04.560] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[01:09:05.190] - Speaker 1
Get out of here. Yeah. I had a teacher that got, I remember Were furious at me. Yeah. I mean, you could see how you could get on the nerves of some of these guys. But there's also something I I think that's another fun thing about school. We're talking about, how would your life have been different? Well, you don't get a story like that unless you're in school in an authoritarian place. And I went to a progressive school, The way stuff is set up, it is you're going to listen to this and you're going to be quiet now. There is something in those situations that can be a good fertile ground for coming up with funny stuff.

[01:10:01.580] - Speaker 2
Remember how great it was when they would bring in the movie projector and show a movie in class?

[01:10:07.130] - Speaker 1
It's the best feeling in the world, right?

[01:10:09.540] - Speaker 2
So much fun. Even if it was bad, it was good. Exactly.

[01:10:13.420] - Speaker 1
I remember when they were saying on the radio, snow days going through, and this school is not meeting in this, and waiting to see if your school is going to... If you're going to get the day off. And just It's the best feeling in the world. It's like that, right? If every day, that's also maybe something good sometimes about work, is it makes you, the weekend is a lot more fun If you've had to work the other days, you appreciate it a lot more.

[01:10:52.330] - Speaker 2
I remember when I was a kid, I broke my leg skiing. The only time I've been skiing my whole life, I broke my leg, and I I didn't have to go to school for six weeks, and it was the greatest. It was just the best. It was just the best.

[01:11:06.030] - Speaker 1
You didn't hate school either, did you?

[01:11:08.560] - Speaker 2
No, but not going to school and being able to watch TV during the day was unbelievable.

[01:11:15.210] - Speaker 1
Yeah. What do you think it was? It's just like...

[01:11:21.960] - Speaker 2
I mean, think about it. Showing up to anything is hard. Yeah. Just showing up.

[01:11:29.730] - Speaker 1
Yeah, which is why they say a lot of times, half of life is just showing up.

[01:11:36.400] - Speaker 2
There's a great thing. Russell Brand has an audiobook. I think it's only available as an audiobook. He talks about being invited to something that sounds great. In two months from now, there's this event, and it sounds great, and you agree to do it, and then the two months come, and it's the day of it, and you're regretting it always. Yeah. He said a good thing that he does now is that anytime he gets invited to do anything in the future, he always thinks about it as if I have to go right now and do it.

[01:12:11.400] - Speaker 1
Oh, God.

[01:12:12.950] - Speaker 2
To weed out the reality of Because two months from now, everything sounds good. Right.

[01:12:19.580] - Speaker 1
I just had that, where I'd been asked about doing a commencement, and I'd been asked a couple of times years ago, and it, no, no, I chickened out. This time when I was asked, I was like, okay, maybe I'll do it. Then as I really thought about in a couple months, and I got to say, I can't do that. But I did say, if we could maybe plan ahead maybe next year. And they said, yes, we'll do it next year. And I was so relieved. Great, because it seems so far away. But I'm sure as I get up close, it'll be, what was I thinking? But sometimes it is good to make yourself do stuff.

[01:13:07.380] - Speaker 2
Absolutely. You get surprised.

[01:13:09.220] - Speaker 1
You get surprised. Yeah, right. There is something to be said for being made to do something that you don't want to do.

[01:13:16.250] - Speaker 2
Absolutely. Today being a perfect example. Yeah, exactly.

[01:13:22.690] - Speaker 1
I wonder also if you said you were a little bit nervous in the beginning, and maybe you picked up on me. I don't know if I really want to go do this. I think part of the struggle is, we talked about connections, is that, okay, so we've been friends for a long time, and sometimes we can get on a roll where we're really having fun talking or really get laughing about something, and that's great. Yeah, you'd love to be able to get that, but then it just seems like too big a mountain How are you ever going to be able to communicate some of those things to somebody? And it just gets discouraging. To me, it's like learning another language. I'll think about, God, I would love to be able to speak anything, Spanish, French, Italian. It would be so great. And then I think about it was so hard for me to learn English and get all all the... Because I think I do pay attention to language and when you get a good word and the idea of starting over in a new language just seems like climbing Mount Everest. And so maybe that was the feeling like, yeah, how are we ever in this format going to talk, get to where it feels just like talking in real life.

[01:15:05.770] - Speaker 1
Maybe that was a little bit of it. I don't know.

[01:15:12.060] - Speaker 2
Yeah. It might have been an unrealistic expectation.

[01:15:14.800] - Speaker 1
Yeah, right.

[01:15:16.320] - Speaker 2
It just is whatever it's going to be, and any expectation you put on it just gets in the way.

[01:15:21.520] - Speaker 1
Yeah, exactly.

[01:15:22.700] - Speaker 2
Also, we've had experiences where we're really laughing about something, and the people around us are I don't know what they're talking about, but whatever it is, I guarantee it's stupid. Yeah, exactly.

[01:15:37.220] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I know. Yeah, because I remember us. There was some going to eat, and there was some miraculous coincidence that had occurred to you that you relayed to me that I was just blown away by. But our dinner companions, they didn't seem to think it was much of anything.

[01:15:59.970] - Speaker 2
It was just- Nonplust.

[01:16:01.430] - Speaker 1
Yeah, nonplust to the extreme.

[01:16:09.460] - Speaker 2
That's a really funny thing, too. Seeing something so funny and someone else doesn't see it at all. There's something really funny about that, too, about the miscommunication or the not getting it.

[01:16:24.240] - Speaker 1
The miscommunication and not being understood or failing. Yeah, there's something. I think that can be... That's really... And I think that because it can tap into sometimes that futility that we all can sometimes get hit with, that Sisyphean... What are we doing?

[01:16:57.100] - Speaker 2
Yeah, we lost the race a thousand years ago. Exactly.

[01:16:59.600] - Speaker 1
Exactly. But then when you're able to... I don't know. I think that is another nice thing about the way that they have the game rigged is that failure can be really funny. And luckily, yeah.

[01:17:25.010] - Speaker 2
Well, we had that experience together where we went to a meeting at a big company talking about an idea that we were excited about and was not well met.

[01:17:35.620] - Speaker 1
No. Not only that, we, going into the meeting, I don't want to say it was a case of Icarus, but we really felt we had another person with us for the meeting and that this was there going to be blown away Absolutely.by these ideas. We had reallyI thought they weren't going to let us out of the office.

[01:18:02.130] - Speaker 2
They were just going to hold us there to keep working on it.

[01:18:04.540] - Speaker 1
First of all, just when we showed up, I thought they were going to rush down to greet us, which didn't happen.

[01:18:11.180] - Speaker 2
Yeah, I thought they were going to roll out the red carpet. They kept us waiting. Did we wait about an hour?

[01:18:15.140] - Speaker 1
It felt like they kept us waiting for an hour, and just all my confidence just disappeared.

[01:18:22.720] - Speaker 2
Also, the place where we were waiting, the feeling was it was closed. I felt like they invited us before, like an hour before they actually opened. Do you remember? Yes.

[01:18:35.060] - Speaker 1
It was like a-It was like a hospital. It was like it was-There was nobody there. It was very white and minimalist. It was really like that.

[01:18:44.490] - Speaker 2
We're in a cavernous space with no people for a long time, for an eternity. Yeah.

[01:18:51.450] - Speaker 1
Then there's that Fitzgerald thing that he wrote about visiting his wife, who had lost her mind, and he said, I lost my small capacity for hope on the small roads leading to Zeldas sanitarium. And I felt that we lost our small capacity for hope in that waiting room that day. Then we go into the meeting.

[01:19:25.000] - Speaker 2
Even before the meeting, we were walking into the meeting, and you shared a very funny story of something that just happened to you.

[01:19:33.320] - Speaker 1
That you prompted me to share that I didn't believe was going to land well with these executives, and I was right. You were right. It didn't land. No. In fact, they took the other side of an argument that I had. And then we go into the meeting, and I maybe said a couple sentences, and then I just fated away. And I don't think You said, I just shut down. I don't think I said anything. No.

[01:20:04.100] - Speaker 2
And your eyes got all glassy, too.

[01:20:05.900] - Speaker 1
Yeah, it was just bombing. And then you, I think, were barefoot. And so I also was thinking, what were we thinking? How could we think that we could come in here? We've got no business in here. We don't belong here. And luckily, the other guy with us did kept talking, and he actually felt it went great afterwards.

[01:20:37.600] - Speaker 2
We should say the third guy with us who was experienced versus us, I believe, was wearing pajamas.

[01:20:47.250] - Speaker 1
Right. And maybe like a fez cap or something.

[01:20:51.710] - Speaker 2
I don't know. Maybe the pajamas were a bad sign. Yeah.

[01:20:56.360] - Speaker 1
But again, that's, I I've been in pitch meetings a lot over the years, and that continues to be one of my most memorable, and it couldn't have gone worse. But We were saying, there's something funny about really failing. With. Yeah, again.

[01:21:21.950] - Speaker 2
You're swinging and nobody even pitched. Yeah. Just like a-Swinging at the wind.

[01:21:27.140] - Speaker 1
A thousand years behind running a race that ended a thousand years ago, running your heart out, not realizing that you'd been lapped a million times.

[01:21:44.590] - Speaker 2
That was incredible. But tell me about your mom when you were a kid. Oh, yeah. Do you ever go to her photosheets?

[01:21:51.880] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Well, I did because when she was working with Richard Avedon in the American West Project that went on for 10 years, where they'd go out for weeks at a time to different places in the West and rodeos and just visiting different places to find people to photograph. So a couple of summers, I went with them when I was a kid. But I mean, Yeah. I mean, my mom's a photographer, and I associate it with interrupting you a lot when you're playing or doing something to take a picture. So I didn't love having my picture taken. I still don't love it. But yeah.

[01:22:54.620] - Speaker 2
Do you get to meet Avedon?

[01:22:56.350] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I got to meet him. I I got to meet him a ton because-What was he like? He had a lot of enthusiasm and energy. He's also cool cool-looking guy. I don't know how he dressed in New York, but when he came out for these, he had boots that he wore and a cowboy hat, but not like a big cowboy hat, more like one of LBJ color and size. He looked cool. Then he loved those Louis Lamour Westerns that I read a ton of. And so he would send me those and boxes of them. And so we connected over that. And he even sent me War and Peace, which I still haven't read, but along with all these Louis Lamault Westerns, and this is probably when I'm 12 with a note saying, this is a book that I love, and it might be advanced for you now, but maybe at some point you'll want to take a look at it. But yeah, so we... Yeah, I really liked him. And he did Yeah, he did some photographs of me and my brothers that my parents were really excited because it's Avedon, and he'd been on the cover of Newsweek, and The idea that he was going to do these portraits of us was a big deal.

[01:24:53.130] - Speaker 1
And I remember he sent them to us for Christmas, and my parents were excited, and When they opened them, the pictures were a little bit in that mode of in the American West. It wasn't the same photographs that my mom did of us for Christmas cards and what she tried to show, which was maybe this idealized version of boys having fun and this. And his pictures were a little bit more unusual And then later, when we started getting into trouble as teenagers and stuff, my dad would think back to those Avedon photographs and say, that's what made Avedon a genius. He could see what was coming with you guys. That's great. Because he wasn't showing us these... Fun loving. Yeah. But... Yeah, you know...

[01:26:07.770] - Speaker 2
What was your relationship with your dad like when you were a kid?

[01:26:12.040] - Speaker 1
It's hard to I came across a note that my mom wrote my aunt, and she's talking, and I must be really little because Luke's not born yet, but she's talking about my older brother and me. And she's saying, Owen, and so I'm probably like two or three, maybe just turning three. And she said, Owen has a very... Idolizes Bobby my dad and has a very zany sense of humor and doesn't like having the same books read to him twice, which is funny because it does seem like kids like having the repetition. Absolutely. But So when you ask the relationship with my dad, I think I did idolize my dad, but I think both my brothers did. Also, he just was really funny. Now, also, you were nervous. You didn't want to step out of line too much, but just a really, I don't know, just a great guy. So if something was bothering you, if something happened to you, my dad was a great person to talk to, I think, because he was a sensitive, kind person, which didn't mean he was a pushover at all. And So that's what I mean about expecting you to have good manners and behave in a thoughtful way also.

[01:27:55.700] - Speaker 1
But I think a big thing was also my dad's friends. He had these great friends that I just thought were really funny, charismatic guys. So sitting there at dinner and seeing my dad with his friends and seeing them joke around. I think that had a big influence on us.

[01:28:24.850] - Speaker 2
I remember there was a story where you had a job when you were a kid, and you thought that if you could make them believe that you weren't that smart, they would give you less work to do.

[01:28:37.480] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I think that's continued a little bit in life and in my career, lowering expectations, which is what we're talking about doing better when there's less pressure. In this job, I was a runner in college at a law firm, and They'd send me out to go pick up something and bring it there and get something, come back with it. I'd always make them explain it a couple of times. Usually, when I was out doing it, I might stop by the magazine stand and read for a while. Anyway, one time I'm coming back into the office through the back door and I hear the assistants and secretaries talking, and one is saying, he's just so stupid. You tell him something like, he's like, so you want me to go down that street and then go right? And her imitation of me was so dumb sounding, made I sound like, Lenny from a Mice and Men. Even though that had been what I was trying to do with lowering expectations, I was still, my feelings were hurt when I came in and heard this imitation. And my pride was such that I quit the job on the spot.

[01:30:28.900] - Speaker 2
So It's so funny because you were purposely trying to make them think you weren't smart enough to do much. Right. And they believed it.

[01:30:37.180] - Speaker 1
Yeah, they believed it.

[01:30:38.810] - Speaker 2
And you quit based on them thinking you weren't smart enough. I don't. Amazing A long story.

[01:30:46.000] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[01:30:47.230] - Speaker 2
Do you always like hanging out in bookstores, even as a kid?

[01:30:52.810] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I remember we were talking about my mom being a photographer, and she had some photography books come out, and my dad did some books. But my dad, being in advertising and public relations, he would go up to the bookstore and always be on them about displaying my mom's book in such a way. And I just always remember as a kid, I even remember the names of the bookstores. I just always love going to bookstores. Well, because they usually also had magazines, too. So that was fun to see. But even as a little kid, going up to my grandmother's, there was something called the Bookmobile that was like-We had that, too. You did? Yeah. So I remember going into that and getting books. And Yeah, I just... I loved reading, and it wasn't anything for school or anything.

[01:31:57.630] - Speaker 2
It was just- Just whatever you were interested in. Me, too. I I used to go to the library all the time as a kid. It was my favorite place to go. I don't remember that there being a bookstore in my little town when I was growing up, but the library I would go to all the time and just anything that I was interested in. I would stay all day and either read the books on the subject I was interested in or get like microfilm of old either newspaper articles. It was just so interesting that idea of being able to go back in history and look at something that happened 50 years ago. Just interesting how it was reported.

[01:32:34.060] - Speaker 1
Well, it's flipped for me because you're talking about subjects you were interested in. So as a kid, I was just reading fiction. So it was any... I love the the Great Brain, that those series of books, and Hardy Boys. Encyclopedia Brown, we talked about. Encyclopedia Brown. We talked about the Louis Lamour Westerns, those S. E. Hinton books. But And then there are a lot of these sports books about a kid dealing with something. I think it's Matt Christopher was that author. So they're just kids' books that I loved reading. The Hardy Boys? Yeah, the Hardy Boys. I had all those. Me too. I love those. And their Chum, Chet, Jalopy. And that's actually fun now with my two boys is reading stories to them. I haven't noticed either of them reads on their own the way I do, but they do like still having me read at night or make up stories. But we read Shane. That was something I read in seventh grade that I loved. They were really into that. They were on Treasure Island now, and And those books hold up. They're good. But anyway, I was talking about the way it flipped.

[01:34:06.380] - Speaker 1
So, yeah, as a kid, I loved reading those. And then in college, it was then reading about something I was interested in. So I could have a paper on the Berlin Airlift, and I'd go to the library, and all of a sudden, every subject but that was really interesting. So a history of back gamut. Let me read about that. And you could just spend so much time in it. I don't know. It's also probably Probably, I think that's a nice thing about museums, people quiet, looking at things. Maybe even the people that you meet there, there's usually a quiet, gentle, to the people that's nice to be around. And I think that can be relaxing. And yeah.

[01:35:12.480] - Speaker 2
Should we go eat?

[01:35:15.350] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[01:35:16.400] - Speaker 2
It's great doing it. It's fun.

[01:35:17.550] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[01:35:29.980] - Speaker 2
It's great doing it. It's fun. Yeah.
