[00:00:07.640] - Speaker 1
Tétragrammaton. Tell me about the world that you entered as a designer.

[00:00:28.380] - Speaker 2
Describe the work environment that you came into when you were starting?

[00:00:34.880] - Speaker 1
I was entering a world where there was a movement from calling commercial art, graphic design. And that was something that I learned at Tyler School of Art. Now, when I was in high school, I thought that was called commercial art, things that were signs, things that were record covers, things that were book jackets, that was part of a thing. And there was something in the word commercial that was a little bit of a put down. There was a designer named Dwyggens from the '20s who had coined the term graphic design, and that if you were making graphic design, you were a graphic designer. In entering that, there was an understanding that you were moving to a higher level profession in terms of the way you might be perceived, most people didn't know that yet. The world that I entered was the world of the '60s. There were a lot of political posters. There were Vietnam War protests. There were things that were from Haight-ashbury. There was Victor Mascoso, an incredible designer who actually was Yale graduated and studied with Alpers on color theory, and then was doing the wildest, most outrageous behavior that we all loved.

[00:01:56.850] - Speaker 1
That was in the music business. It was the Phil Maurice type posters. And then there were a whole pile of devotes and followers. This guy is still around, by the way. He's quite wonderful. Incredible. Then there is my husband and Pushbin and Milton Glazer, Seymour Quast, and Ed Sorel. They came at it from an illustration point of view, but Seymour drew an alphabet from an ink box design he had done where he had made an A that looked like an ink drip. It became like a '60s typeface. It was called Artone. People didn't know it. It was really from a commercial job he had done. It became this alphabet that I thought, because I didn't know him when I first saw it, I thought it was an analogous to bell-bottom pants because it was thin on the top and buy it on the bottom, and I thought it was a hippie type because it went with the fashion.So cool.But that was the world.

[00:02:51.700] - Speaker 2
Tell me about, were the offices like we'd see in Mad Men?

[00:02:56.660] - Speaker 1
That was the advertising business, which was, I I think, very different from graphic design and tone and tempo. Those guys wore suits to work, and they were much more clean scrubbed, and they were dealing with big corporate clients, and they would spend a lot of time in meetings, and they had bottles of scotch on their wall. I remember going around to those offices. Even later, when I worked with gray Advertising, doing their corporate headquarters, I saw that still there. There was still the whiskey bottle sitting on the countertop for or like a 5:00 PM snort or whatever that was.

[00:03:33.590] - Speaker 2
There's still that relationship, though, between graphic design and advertising. It feels like they're related modalities, no?

[00:03:42.760] - Speaker 1
Well, I think they're described as being in that realm of creation for business. But they really function very differently, and what they supply is different. They've become more confused lately because Because a lot of television advertising went away. So they've begun to sell identity, and they sell it very different than design firms do because they're really looking to get the identity as a means to get whatever the promotion and the advertising is. But identity is foundational. Theoretically, if you're designing an identity for a corporation, you want it to last 20 to 40 years. You don't want to turn it around like Instagram. There are two fields coming at it with opposite directions.

[00:04:35.840] - Speaker 2
Graphic design is something that you want to have a timeless appeal, whereas advertising is really more of the moment, it's to catch your attention now. Tomorrow, if it feels old, it's okay because it's only for today. Would you say that's right?

[00:04:53.330] - Speaker 1
I think that's what happens. I don't think that that's the intent. I think it's the nature of the way they do their business. Because the thing is that if I think about companies I've worked with, and I have logos that are around for 25 years, going on 30 and some. They are foundational because they're designed not really to go out of style. Sometimes they have to be tweaked. Sometimes you design something and the weight is fashionable, say, of typography in a given period, and then five or six years later, it changes, and that you do need to tweak and adjust because you don't want it to look dated. It's like clothing, hems go up and down. But theoretically, there's got to be something in the logo that is inherently recognizable. What happens is that with the advertising agencies, they want to define what the positioning statement is and the theme of the organization. When an organization is new or it has a new president, and that might last only five years. So then whatever they design in that capacity becomes irrelevant, where if you're looking for, I would say, more of an abstraction of form and less about style, you can make something that's really lasting because people recognize it.

[00:06:11.620] - Speaker 1
And then if it has to be adjusted, it's very minor. And you So the Coca-Cola has a module of how you're supposed to think about these things. The Coca-Cola logo, essentially, was designed in the 1800s. Wow. I mean, there really is a script that was designed, has evolved over the years to be the way you see Coca-Cola today. And that in their quadrant, they say that the logo is sacrosanct and it stays forever. And that's in the upper left-hand part of the quadrant. In the upper right-hand part of the quadrant is packaging. And packaging stays for a period of time enough to become recognizable, but has to evolve in style or form or various things, so it keeps it contemporary. Then below it is advertising. And advertising can be seasonal or it can adjust to be very quick if you need to in certain instances if you're launching a new product with it. There, the logos in the corner are never changed. And on the package, the logos have never changed. Then, though they have Coke and Coca-Cola, they've added devices to it. Then in the following quadrant is promotion. Promotion is the quickest changing thing, and that's Instagram.

[00:07:29.120] - Speaker 2
Something like the Coca-Cola green, the green bottle of Coca-Cola, that was what a Coke bottle looked like for a really long time. It was a design choice. They stuck with it for a period of time, and then somebody decides either we don't want to use glass bottles anymore and we're going to tin cans, or what happens when there's a decision to make a big change in a brand that's ubiquitous?

[00:07:54.550] - Speaker 1
I would imagine it's cost. I think usually when there's that a shift you're dealing with. And also convenience. It may be that the glass was breaking or the kids couldn't handle it. I'm not inside Coke. I happen to have known that thing because I worked on a product that Coca-Cola produced called Trevilla, and that's the first time I saw the chart. But I don't actually know the mechanisms of the corporation. But I would guess from other corporations, when you make a decision like that to suddenly change something that's classic, then you do it because of cost issues. And that I I think the glass bottles still exist, but I think they become more promotional and they become this thing that they're putting out as specialty items, like anniversary bottles. I mean, companies that have legacies do that. Now, I worked for Tiffany and they have this very firm model. And what I did when I worked for them in the '90s was pick their blue color swatch that they already had, but it had to be universal because they distribute the product all over the world and the dilots would change depending upon where you bought the box.

[00:09:02.970] - Speaker 1
So that was something that had to be controlled very tightly. And that they had very big typography initially when I worked for them on their boxes, and it made them look cheap, and I just made it really small on the box. It changed the whole look. It looked like you could raise the price just by those adjustments because there were cues you learn in terms of how things fit in categories and what expectations are. I mean, that's part of working in commerce. It also has to do with esthetics to a degree because it's a statement of a certain taste.

[00:09:39.960] - Speaker 2
But was there a time that the large Tiffany logo made sense?

[00:09:44.380] - Speaker 1
I'll tell So when I saw the packaging, I was really shocked. They had, at the time that they hired me, they worked mostly with manufacturers. And the people who ran the jewelry stores were just making the their decisions. They had a blue, but the blue wasn't... Their big problem with it was it didn't look the same in all places. So that was one problem. But then they had made decisions that were surprising on something that's essentially an upscale product. They had a ribbon, not a ribbon, it was some cord they had that was really fat and looked clunky on their shopping bags. Then they had the very big tie bumpings. Essentially, if you look at a Tiffany ad, you don't even see the logo. They use the blue box and they have a white ribbon around it, and that's their classic. Never have to change that. Isn't that fantastic? Absolutely.

[00:10:38.170] - Speaker 2
You worked at Columbia, I guess you worked at CBS Records for a period of time. Was this in the '70s?

[00:10:45.390] - Speaker 1
Yes.

[00:10:46.350] - Speaker 2
Describe that environment.

[00:10:48.950] - Speaker 1
Well, it was very male. I was one of very few women on the floor. I worked there twice. I worked in the advertising department first for about two years, and I was making ads for records. That's where I learned everything I know about office politics. Then I had designed an ad campaign that the head art director at Atlantic Records liked. He hired me, and I got to do ads and record covers because they were done in the same department. That's when I started designing album covers. I did them for a year, and they won awards and gotten some design annuals and things like that. I was hired back by an art director named John Berg to be East Coast Art Director.

[00:11:33.360] - Speaker 2
What were some of the covers you did when you were at Atlantic?

[00:11:36.970] - Speaker 1
Charles Minkus Changes One and Two, which were classics. John Prime, Common Sense. Then there were artists like Dee Dee Bridgewater who were lesser known. It's funny because I just went through them because I'm giving some work to a museum in Munich. There were 25. I can't remember them all. There was a guy named, I think his name was maybe Steve Wright. They weren't big, and they were jazz musicians and quite good. I did a lot of jazz work at CBS as well. At CBS, I think the biggest people I did, I did a Dylan album, I did Bruce Springsteen-Allen, and I did a bunch of Billy Joel albums that were probably the most famous artists. Then there was Boston, which I hate.

[00:12:27.330] - Speaker 2
But it's an important... I mean, It lives on in the culture.

[00:12:33.010] - Speaker 1
I had a friend named Marty Picard, who was a copywriter at CBS, and he says, When you die, your tombstone is going to say, Design the Boston cover. I've lived in horror forever That might even be a picture on the tombstone of the UFO. Oh, God.

[00:12:54.020] - Speaker 2
At that time, CBS was huge corporate entity, and Atlantic was still... It was big, but it was an independent label. Did they feel like different places working at the two?

[00:13:04.790] - Speaker 1
They were totally different. Atlantic was very much driven by Ahmet and Nessie Erdigan. Nessie, I worked with directly because it was a very intimate place, and he was in charge of the taste-making decisions that had to do with the corporation. He saw he approved every album cover I worked on, and he was lovely. He was a very elegant man, and he really cared about craft, and they were small, and they could not afford to spend more on album covers or higher big photo sessions. They operated with a economy, even though they were a part of at that time, they were a part of Warner Brothers. And CBS was big and corporate, and there were a lot of hierarchy within the company, but I had already learned to manage it. When I worked in the advertising department at CBS, I used to design trade ads. Those are the ads that went into Cashbox and Billboard, and then occasionally you'd get to do Rolling Stone, and they would come out for every album. The way the ad system worked is I was assigned a copywriter who was this person I mentioned before named Marty Picard, and we'd be given a name of a recording artist and a basis of the way they wanted to talk about the album, which usually meant breaking out in three radio stations or what have you, and Then you'd have some terrible shot, and then you'd have something called a Mini, which was an album cover that was cut in half and made the title of the album really big on the top.

[00:14:40.600] - Speaker 1
That was done in its own department, and they were really ugly as hell. You were supposed to put them on the bottoms of the albums, and you wrote some copy line about them, and they went into the trades. The way they were approved was they were attached to a routing slip, and the routing slip was stapled to whatever the paper was that your ad layout was on. And in the first day, on Monday, you do it in the morning, and on the afternoon, it would go from the head art director to the copy chief to the guy who is the Department head of Creative Services. And somewhere in there it would go back for changes. So the next day you'd change it and it would go and it would go past those three people who already made a change. And then it would go upstairs. And we go upstairs to product managers and producers and people like that. And then invariably it would some more changes. Then it would come back downstairs. And by the time it came downstairs because they were out to lunch or in meetings, it would be the end of the day and you didn't do anymore.

[00:15:37.690] - Speaker 1
Then it would be Wednesday, the day it was due, and you'd finish it at about seven o'clock at night and get it out to the trade. Then I realized, what was the point of doing anything at the beginning of the week? You might as well wait till Wednesday and do the whole because they'd be out of time. That's when the work got good, I have to tell you. Great.

[00:15:55.350] - Speaker 2
It's good to know. Useful. I've been on those CC on those art pieces that get sent around. It's a bizarre method in a big corporation.

[00:16:07.260] - Speaker 1
It had nothing to do with anything. It had nothing to do with the quality of anything or whether or not an audience would perceive it or understand what it was. It was just a method they had that they adhered to. It was like that when I started, and it was like that when I left it. It just stayed the same.

[00:16:24.010] - Speaker 2
That speaks to what you said before about Tiffany. Probably at one point in time, when the record company started, it was built with few people and based on taste. Then as it gets bigger, it becomes this other thing, and people who are more concerned with commerce than art take over. Then things like, Well, let's put the logo big on it because we're selling it, and the bigger the logo is, the better it's going to look. More chance we'll sell it if it's big. That's right. It's like that mentality of people who don't understand what they're doing making these choices.

[00:17:00.160] - Speaker 1
That's exactly what happened at CBS. The founder was a guy named Goddard Liberson, who was an incredible tasteful man. Essentially, they were publishing classical music. Then they had John Hammond, who discovered Billy holiday, along with a myriad of other... Dylan. I mean, the list is staggering.

[00:17:20.230] - Speaker 2
Yeah, Bruce Springsteen, Bob Dylan.

[00:17:22.270] - Speaker 1
Bob Dylan. There was a very long list that I used to know by heart, and he was a really lovely, elegant man.

[00:17:27.520] - Speaker 2
Stevie Ray Vawn. They were Yes. A wide range over a long period of time.

[00:17:34.970] - Speaker 1
Even Benny Goodman. Yeah, incredible. He was one of his first discoveries and then decided, Okay, he's moving on. He was a guy who moved on, and his taste was just impeccable. If you can think about Godard Liberson and John Hammond, what happened somewhere along the way is I think Mitch Miller became really powerful in the company, and he had a television show, and so the music taste became very mainstream stream. And there was a period, I think, where they were very late into getting into rock and roll. I think that wasn't until the Philmore concert where Janis Joppel played and got signed. Monterey Pop. I think Monterey. Monterey Pop. Yeah, that was it. It was amazing that the company had changed because it was a really middle-of-the-road company after Godard Lippison had died. And then it became a bit of a rock and roll company. Not so much, but they had foundational artists. They had artists who were songwriters who were going to sustain periods of time like Bob Dylan, like Bruce Springsteen, like Billy Joel, which was smart. That was Columbia Records. That was that label. Epic Records was more like Boston. It was it hits and then they would fade and they get the next guy.

[00:18:48.410] - Speaker 1
And that's how they operated them.

[00:18:51.160] - Speaker 2
Did you work in the Black Rock building?

[00:18:53.650] - Speaker 1
Yep.

[00:18:54.490] - Speaker 2
What a beautiful building.

[00:18:56.770] - Speaker 1
Eeroceran, gorgeous. I love it. That's the first time I saw Ames furniture in that building. Lou Dorzmann, who was the design director of the whole company, had designed the elevator buttons. There's a typeface called CBS Dito that's on all those buttons, and they are gorgeous to this day.

[00:19:18.340] - Speaker 2
The CBS logo was incredible. There's a book of all the CBS, the language of the CBS logo that's beautiful. Do all companies have that style guide of how to use what everything looks like associated with it so that you know it's coming from this brand?

[00:19:35.920] - Speaker 1
Well, we make them all the time. Every time I design something, we make them. I think most companies do. Most organizations, when they buy design, if they know what they're doing, have to understand how they're going to execute it. If they're a large company, though, they already may have a built-in in-house art department that you train and work with to begin to get them to understand how to work with the identity and the typography. We were just just finishing an identity where they had a very practiced in-house art department, and we worked with them when developing it. It's a collaboration, so they know they can execute it. I mean, these things really do matter. What was interesting about the record business floor, which was 10 through 12, those floors, is they didn't conform to CBS graphics. We did crazy stuff because we were the record industry, so we hung all kinds of stuff on the the wall, and the walls were metal. So you had to hang them up with magnets because that's the only way they stayed on the wall. Then sometimes somebody from corporate would come down and write a little report that you had messed up the wall.

[00:20:42.050] - Speaker 1
But the corporation on the whole was just very design-conscious and very caring about it.

[00:20:49.150] - Speaker 2
There's something about design. In my case, I was a kid, I was going to NYU, and I was lucky enough to go to the Black Rock building on a regular basis. From stepping down into the sunken area before you get to the lobby, you could feel like you're in a special place. And riding up in the elevator, you felt like you were in a special place. This wasn't an apartment building. This wasn't even an office building. My I ant worked at Este Lauder, and I would be in that building all the time. It was nothing like Black Rock. Black Rock had a seriousness about it, an attention to detail that I had never experienced before. And I I loved it, and I felt like it was almost like a cathedral in a way.

[00:21:36.390] - Speaker 1
It was Bill Paley, who was the president of CBS. He had a second in command who was a design... He's the person that hired the architect. He was the person that decided it should be Eames furniture. He was the person who oversaw Lou Dorzman when Lou Dorzman was doing the DDo, CBS logo that's still on everything. They're really amazing. That was the philosophy of the company, and it was incredible to work there because it mattered and you knew it was different. Those things you experienced were planned.

[00:22:09.440] - Speaker 2
When you work in a place like that, I imagine it has to have some impact on your work of like, Okay, this is real. This is the big time. I have to do my best. Look where I am.

[00:22:21.300] - Speaker 1
We were introduced. If a recording artist came, and I actually had... The position for a period of time is when Paul McCartney came and a few other recording artists were checking us out to see if they wanted to sign with CBS, and they would come down and they would say, We'll go to our award-winning art department. The company promoted it as part of the CBS image, that this was going to be this very classy operation, that we didn't do things on the cheap, that the people were highly trained professionals, and that the work was going to be at this very high level. That was implicit in the offer. And some people joined the company because of that.

[00:23:04.000] - Speaker 2
Beautiful. When you were working on album covers, did you get to meet artists ever, or was it more just dealing with product managers?

[00:23:11.100] - Speaker 1
No, the artist had contractual cover approval. You met with all of them. Or they did it by phone. I never met Bob Dylan in person, but I talked to him a lot when I did Hard Rain. I rubbed down some press type in the corner of the photograph and it looked not very I told him it would be straight when we typeset it, and he said, No, I like it that way. I like messy. I'll never forget that. It ran like that. It's always been like that. I mean, there were things like that that happened that were wonderful. But they had contractual cover approval, and they would come sometimes individually. Usually, if they were coming individually, usually there was a project manager with them. Then there would be wives, then there might be the manager, then there might be a whole band and the whole band's wives and everybody's favorite sidekick to come along and look at it. You never knew. You just never knew who was going to come. And it always worked. Some were more frustrating than others. It really depended upon what their expectation was. I found some of it boring and repetitive because there were so many new artists that were continually signed, and they were very concerned about their photos on their covers, and they wanted to be styled and makeup and hair and lots of money spent on this thing, and then they would be very stilted in the photo, and it would be hard to put together.

[00:24:36.140] - Speaker 1
I remember on the Dream Police album for Cheap Trick, we had a lineup. They were dressed as police on the front on the back covers, and then they were in a lineup on the inside. It was in one of those open up packages. I had to replace different heads on different bodies. In those days, there wasn't Photoshop, so you had to take a dye transfer and you had to have the retoucher sand it so we could cut it out and put it on the photo and retouch it so you didn't see the cut lines, but all the heads were transposed.

[00:25:10.160] - Speaker 2
Amazing. A concept for a cover, would it often come from an artist? Would it come from a designer? How did covers come to be?

[00:25:19.130] - Speaker 1
If it was a jazz album, it was usually me. I would come up with an idea because it would be based on the title. Jazz artists tend not to be vain. They didn't especially want to be on the covers. I I got a lot of illustration for jazz, and that's where I really also became a type designer in a strong sense, because particularly when we ran out of money in the late '70s, I began doing covers just purely in type. They were wonderful to work with the jazz artist because they really liked the idea that I was going to be creative with their cover. Sometimes they came in with Wives, sometimes they came in alone. I used to work, I think I did four or five covers for John McGlachlin. He was first Maha Vishnu, John McGlacklin, when I met him, he came in like a Harry Chrishnan in the robes and the thing. I actually did not like Fusion Jazz, and I hated listening to his music. He came in one day after, I don't I'm three years of working with him where he was a hara Krishna, and he came in and he was wearing a leather jacket.

[00:26:19.660] - Speaker 1
He'd cut his hair and he's like, One of the handsomest guys I ever saw. I said, Oh, my God. He said, I'm into materialism. Then he locked my door and made me listen to a full two records said he was putting out. It was very funny. Stuff like that happened all the time. Wow.

[00:26:37.650] - Speaker 2
It's the fun of the record business.

[00:26:40.080] - Speaker 1
That was great. They were all over the map, though. I mean, that sometimes the artists were terrific to work with. Bruce Springsteen came in. I did Darkness on the Edge of Town, and Bruce Springsteen had the appointment and came up, and he pulled out these two Polaroids that were taken by his butcher. And they were great. I mean, they were really... They were beautiful. And the album was a darker album. And if you take, I think it followed Born to Run. And if you consider the difference in the two covers This one was like, okay, this pop, wonderful guy who's on stage moving around and playing with his saxophonist all the time and all of that. The second one was a little deeper. It was easy to design because it had to be rough. You knew this was rougher and it's not pretty, but it's beautiful. I always liked that cover. It was really him. He came in with the shots.

[00:27:39.820] - Speaker 2
How would you decide between a typographic cover, an illustration or a photograph? Do each of those things, whether it be on an album cover or in an ad, do they communicate different things?

[00:27:57.750] - Speaker 1
That's really a good question. I never quite had a handle on it. They would say I couldn't use illustration on a pop cover because that was a signal it was a jazz cover. Except for the reason it was a signal it was a jazz cover is I used to buy illustration for jazz covers just because I didn't have to do the shot of the recording artist, and I liked it. I liked them, and I thought they were terrific-looking and memorable, and the other ones looked more or less the same. So then it became defined by the company as a jazz cover, and then it became difficult to use. But of Of course, there was Boston, and there was something that was called heatwave too hot to handle. I had used the same illustrator. I used the same illustrators on jazz covers. I really didn't see that that way. But I do think the public... Actually, the public had its own rhythm about what they liked. When I think about it, there was no market research. There was no testing in those days.

[00:28:53.190] - Speaker 2
I just heard a story recently about Andy Warhol, and he became a commercial artist because at the time, it was unfashionable in advertising to use photographs. There was a lot of work for straight illustration of products, and that's what he did. But it wasn't out of choice. It was more like, Well, that's what the market needed, and he was able to do that.

[00:29:16.140] - Speaker 1
That's how that works. It's funny because we're all, I think, at least the people I respect, are really serious about the craft, that the making of the thing and keeping it at at a high standard and pushing the industry forward is really our overall goal in doing it. So when you can elevate the expectation of what something can be, that's a breakthrough. And he was actually a terrific illustrator. Those drawings were great. That lifted up that part. Then, of course, he became the way we know him. But that is not an unworthy achievement.

[00:30:00.210] - Speaker 2
When you decided to become a designer, was it a popular thing to do at the time?

[00:30:05.380] - Speaker 1
No, most people didn't know what it was.

[00:30:07.620] - Speaker 2
How did it work out that you did it?

[00:30:10.010] - Speaker 1
I wasn't good at really anything else. My mother wanted me to get my teaching certification so I could teach public school like she did. I remember when I told her I was going to move to New York and be a designer, she says, Oh, Paula, you can't do anything like that. That takes talent. You know what I mean?

[00:30:26.340] - Speaker 2
It was So you were an abused child?

[00:30:33.780] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I did have that.

[00:30:36.520] - Speaker 2
When did branding become a big deal? Has it always been or is that a newer thing?

[00:30:42.810] - Speaker 1
You can't really brand something. That's silly in terminology because a brand is not what you make it. A brand is what you make it plus the way everybody else perceives it plus everything that happens along the way. If you take Chipotle, which is a nice fast food place, and it can have nice graphics, and the place the food is reasonably okay for the price, et cetera, but there was food poisoning. So the brand owns food poisoning. And And you can't take that away. So if you say, I branded Chipotle, that's like branding food poisoning. I'm using an extreme example. But the assertion that this thing that you work as part of is going to stick forever and be this thing is just not possible because you can't predict. And I don't like to say that I do branding. I like to say that I'm an identity designer, a visual identity designer. And what that means is that you're going to see something and you're going to associate it with the product and that that is going to be what that thing looks like. It doesn't mean that that's what the product is or becomes. It's just that's what that looks like, which is different.

[00:32:03.270] - Speaker 1
That's what logos are. You very rarely now design just a logo. You're usually designing a visual system. You have the logo and the logo can animate and the logo can become large and small and exist in three dimensions and all of the things that needs to be recognized. But it's really a system.

[00:32:21.440] - Speaker 2
While we're on fast food, you designed the Shake Shack logo, and it really looks different than everything else. When you see a shake Shake Shack for a fast food place, it has an air of sophistication just based on the signage. How did you come to work on Shake Shack?

[00:32:41.590] - Speaker 1
Well, Pentagram's office used to be on Madison Square Park. We had bought a small building there. Danny Myers was a terrific restauranteur, and he had two restaurants across the park, and he was on the board of Madison Square Park. I did the Kennedy from Madison Square Park because they brought it to me and wanted me to do it for free and told me if I didn't want to do it, it was okay, and they'd bring it to the competing firm around the corner. And I thought, oh, no, I'm going to have to get up and look at their logo every day. So I had become involved with the park. And then the park began having art shows in the park and really building up this incredible system of shows, exhibits, and events in that park. And one of the events was Danny Meyer put a taxi in the park and made a hot dog stand there because he always was inspired by his childhood in the Midwest, where he remembered all these fast food places where he felt he got a good meal. And he felt that was missing today. So his goal, if Danny Myers had a mission statement, I mean, he is a hospitality person, but his goal was to make a better fast food place, charge $2 more for the hamburger, and put brisket in it so it stayed soft, that it didn't get hard like a burger does.

[00:34:06.020] - Speaker 1
And he succeeded. It was great. But the building was a prefab building that was put together by a terrific architect He was a postmodern architect who did all the best stores in Virginia that had buildings that came apart from each other. And what he designed was this structure that was dropped in the park because it was prefab, so they didn't to build it and disrupt the park. And they originally, I think when it first opened, they were bringing water over from the restaurants, and then they had the plumbing put in. And that was the first Shake Shack. And the structure of the building, which had a An awning that came out looked very what I would call modern, which is a style from the late '40s that looks like streamlined. It was the design of trains and the things Raymond Loewy was making.

[00:35:02.780] - Speaker 2
It's like post-deco.

[00:35:03.940] - Speaker 1
Right. It was more modernist, but there was a typeface that was introduced called Neutra, which came out at that period. You could tell it was a streamlined typeface because the middle bar on the E drops lower and it creates the sense of periodness about it. I use that inside this band that was in the dropped-in architecture. It's said shakes and sodas, and they actually call that the Purple Cow, and I don't know why they named it that. Maybe they were going to put something that was called the Purple Cow in there and never did. It runs around Shake Shack, and then the type on the top is big. At first, we did it without the icons in the park. And then Danny said he missed the neon of his childhood. So we couldn't put neon in the signage because we didn't know what neighborhoods would allow it, depending upon ordinances. So we just made neon icons. And then sometimes they were neon and sometimes they're not. But that's part of their packaging and their system. And we did it twice. We did it for the building. And then when he decided to make it a chain, then we added the other the menu boards and all the other stuff that went with it.

[00:36:16.400] - Speaker 1
It did look different from everything else. They didn't call it fast food. They called it fast casual dining. It's a whole category.

[00:36:24.130] - Speaker 2
It's great.

[00:36:25.340] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I always loved it. It was fun doing it, too, because it's wonderful to work with somebody else who's inventing something. That's what he was doing.

[00:36:38.570] - Speaker 2
What's it like being out in the world and coming across something that you've designed, unexpectedly? What is that feeling when you're just out and about and there's a sign or something goes by? It's like, Oh, I did that. What does it feel like?

[00:36:57.420] - Speaker 1
Well, right now, I forget. I mean, there are 20 million city banks all over the place. I walk by them every day. I don't even think about them. It's strange. And the same with... Sometimes what I really like are the shake-shacks in Europe because they're all designed differently, which was part of our thinking in the place. And there's a woman who came out of the architecture firm who built the original Shake Shack. And what she does is position the type on the building so it works with the architecture like the first one did. So they're all different, but they're all the same because it's the same thinking about it, but they're different sizes. Sometimes they're a neon, sometimes they're built out of something else, sometimes they have light bulbs in them. I mean, they're all over the place depending upon where they are. And so that when I'm in Europe, they even get more distinguished. Like there was one in Covent Garden where it was barely branded at all, but it was all in the right places. Or you'll go to another place in London in a suburb, they have this enormous sign on a very little building.

[00:37:58.590] - Speaker 1
And that's charming. I always love seeing that because you don't know what it's going to be. But I don't have the same thrill about it that I did when I was much younger. What I do like is that I have former assistants, particularly who go to old record stores and buy up my album covers. Sometimes I have to buy them back from them. Great. It's great.

[00:38:21.280] - Speaker 2
Have there always been logos and marks?

[00:38:24.980] - Speaker 1
Well, a trademark is a mark that stands by itself or can be combined with type.

[00:38:32.940] - Speaker 2
Like the swoosh, for example.

[00:38:35.140] - Speaker 1
Well, the swoosh is Nike's mark. But it's not Nike. Originally, it was with not Nike. Now you can understand it without words. It only takes 30 years to do that. It's built up with a brilliant advertising campaign by Wyden Kennedy. So you associate with movement. It's all about sport. You look at the thing, you know what it means. So you don't need words. But corporate marks do because they may have initials and then you don't know what it is and you need it labeled. I think that marks that completely worked on their own, the Westinghouse logo with the dots, the W. But there was a whole type family for Westinghouse that existed with it that Paul Rand designed when he did the Westinghouse logo. And these things become iconic and you know what they are. When you introduce a logo, if it's a mark, you generally need type to express it. But a logo and a mark also, you don't need to have a mark. You can just have a logo, which is just the name, and the name is designed in some font. That can be as understandable, usually a lot of times they're initials, and you look at it, you know exactly what it is, and you know what the company is.

[00:39:47.530] - Speaker 1
Then you don't need the secondary type. You need the secondary type if you need to register it, and there are other things that look like that slightly.

[00:39:56.230] - Speaker 2
There's the Apple Apple, and then there's the type that says Apple, and it says it the same way all the time, and sometimes they're together, but often separately, and either one works depending on the use, yes?

[00:40:08.570] - Speaker 1
At this point in time, you would recognize it on almost anything. You could take the Apple logo and buy a white box that looks like it's for lunch and stick the logo in the middle of it, and you would think that Apple went into the food business. You could, in fact, do that very easily. I mean, things have... They become iconic in use and fame and promotion, and it's really that's what you want them to do. That's the goal of it.

[00:40:35.100] - Speaker 2
Was there ever a time in the record business where the person who designed the album cover also designed all the advertising and everything that went around, everything around it, or was it always separate?

[00:40:45.590] - Speaker 1
Well, at CBS, it was separate because that's the way the company was set up. Sometimes I would do a poster for an album I worked on. I did some of that with Billy Joel for a while. But usually, the departments were very specific, and they didn't like that because it would take away It would take away the power of one of the departments because the cover department was always more powerful than the advertising department. So they wanted to make themselves felt as the only people who understood advertising. That was all political. I don't know if it mattered one way or the other, to be quite honest with you.

[00:41:15.070] - Speaker 2
I think, if anything, the opposite. It sounds like whoever came up with the creative feeling for a piece, the more involvement they had in the whole campaign would probably be a good thing, seems like, no?

[00:41:28.170] - Speaker 1
Well, it's hard to say because it really It depends upon what money was budgeted for it. If you had a major artist, very often they went outside firms to do that stuff because there was a lot of pushback on the advertising department. Now, I used to make a lot of promotions for record stores, which were posters, not ads. There was a series I did called The Best of Jazz that was all constructivist design on craft paper. There were, I think, 20 albums in the series, and that all the albums were packaged like this. The posters were in the store. And you saw that. That's what you were talking about. But that was really, really rare, largely because you couldn't even know what space you were going to get in the record store for it. And a place like Tower Records, the owner of the store actually used to select how much space something would get based on whether or not he wanted to hang it up in a store. So you just didn't know. And that there would be promotional men from the field who would be going out and trying to get positioning and placement But they were never seen very successful to me in my memory of it.

[00:42:33.390] - Speaker 2
Who would set up the photo sessions for artists?

[00:42:36.990] - Speaker 1
Well, the art directors did. I did that. You did that. I mean, a lot of the job, I think, was really, really management. You were setting up photo sessions. You were getting makeup and hair done. You were hiring sometimes a stylist for their clothing. We went through a series of genre photographers. There was this wonderful photographer named Bill King, who was a fashion photographer, and he would always shoot the performing artists in motion. And you can tell his shots right away from the '70s. He was very hot for a period of time. And Norman Seath and a pile of others who had huge styles that were popular, and then you transferred out of them. I actually had some of my best cover shot by Richard Avedon. He was amazing. He took Muddy Waters, and Muddy had come up into his studio, and we were going to photograph him, and Muddy was wearing a hat and a coat, and he wouldn't let Muddy take it off. He pushed him against a white wall, took six pictures, and said, I have it, and he did. It was gorgeous. That was hard again. Amazing. It's beautiful photography.

[00:43:47.000] - Speaker 2
The difference in type that's hand-drawn versus typeset or machine set. Tell me about the difference in what they look like, what they feel like, the perception of them.

[00:44:00.380] - Speaker 1
Well, you won't see that anymore. There won't be the difference in it. In the old days, you could because it looked like it was handcrafted and you could see error. Now, and this is actually very exciting, Almost everything we design is a bespoke font. And it is because the computer software really has grown to the point that it perfects as you're doing it. And there's a course called Type a Cooper Union. And the art students go and they take the courses, and they not only can draw complete alphabets, they can program them. So we compete with the tight businesses because the tight businesses sell licensing. And what they do is, this is really, I think it was a mistake. But instead of being partners of the designer, they became competitors of the designer in that they want you to purchase the font for some use for a corporation, and they sell the a license, and they have to rebuy the license every three years. So they're buying the same thing that they were using over and over again, where a type designer is more likely never to do that, an individual type designer, but to create a font and create one fee for the use of it and let the company have it.

[00:45:17.900] - Speaker 1
The graphic designers who have become type designers, which are really young people starting out and they do great work. Then there are the the older type designers who made foundries and started selling them, and they're selling licensing fees.

[00:45:32.840] - Speaker 2
How do you find young design talent to work in the company?

[00:45:39.430] - Speaker 1
Well, I teach.

[00:45:41.100] - Speaker 2
Through students?

[00:45:42.890] - Speaker 1
Absolutely. Students and referrals from other teachers who have good students. That's generally how I found most of my staff. My associate is a woman named Kirstin Uber, and Kirstin was my student, and Then she worked as an intern at Pentagram for me. Then I sent her down to the public theater to be their in-house art director, and she had worked on the public theater for me internally, so she knew the public theater. If you I never saw the film abstract, she's the woman on the computer doing... Then she went to the wing when it was open, which was designed by another Pentagram partner, Emily Obermann, and then came back to me during COVID because my senior who was also a student, had gone to Apple. They stole them. I couldn't compete. It was COVID. I had no one to even know who to hire because we're all sitting in rooms by ourselves. And then I realized I realized that the wing had folded and that Kirstin was available, so I grabbed her back.

[00:46:50.310] - Speaker 2
Great.

[00:46:50.840] - Speaker 1
That was great.

[00:46:51.990] - Speaker 2
Tell me the story of Pentagram from the beginning.

[00:46:54.960] - Speaker 1
Well, Pentagram is a really unusual design firm. It was founded by by three men in London, and it was originally called Fletcher Forbes Gill, Colin Forbes, Alan Fletcher, and Bob Gill. They had an idea that designers should share profit and come together and not worry about who got the job that paid the most, but that the combination of talent would make everything elevate. Actually, it didn't work in the first year, and Bob Gill left. Then an architect named Theo Crosby joined, and so they decided to make it Crosby, Fletcher, Forbes, always in alphabetical order. Architecture is on a different time frame because the projects take much longer. So that Theo would have very big projects, but they might go on between two or three years. And the graphic designers are turning around things more quickly, but the fees are lower. And that worked all right. And then they decided to make an associate who worked for Alan Fletcher, a partner, and his name was Mervyn Polansky. But they didn't put his name on the firm because he had a big, long Jewish name, and they didn't want to put it on the firm. He was annoyed by it.

[00:48:08.080] - Speaker 1
Then Kenneth Grange joined, and he was a product designer. He's actually Sir Kenneth now. He designed all of the Kenwood appliances in Great Britain, the washers and dryers and things that everybody had in their kitchen that they grew up with. He did that at Pentagram. He became the fifth partner, and Irving got annoyed because his name wasn't on the firm. It was going to be Cosby, Fletcher, Forbes, Grange and no Krelansky. So they went off, I think, to a little partners meeting, and they had a fight about it. And Alan was reading a book on Black Magic, and he said, let's name it Pentagram. There are five of us. So that's how the name came to be. And then that was stupid because the next year, John McDonal joined, and then there were six, but they didn't want to go through the name change. So I think part of the reason for Pentagram's longevity is this removing ownership of it through different people who decide not to change anything and to use the formula for it. And we've never changed the logo since the logo was designed. We have all these designers. You think, no, we don't want to touch it.

[00:49:14.080] - Speaker 1
No one will ever agree. It's pointless. Right now, there are 21 partners. We have offices in New York, in London, and then individual offices, one in Berlin and one in Austin, Texas. And that had to do with just happenstance of people who were in a bigger office or something moved around and they wound up on their own, but they still are part of the system. What's unique is that the partners are essentially running their own business and sharing, and that the sharing is very important because it understands that design business is not predictable. Certain industries go up and down. For example, somebody was working for a cryptocurrency currency company, things like that do happen. But collectively, you're much stronger. And the likelihood we're all going to go out of the business at the same time is not real. So that means that there's a certain security in the numbers and that also we own the business and we've developed stock in the business so that you don't get old and just be left with your drawing tables like so many designers were. But the The significance of it is that if you're responsible and you run your business and you take on enough work where you're profitable and you also can control the work you do, you can do pro bono work or do things for free because you want to, and you can grow your visual vocabulary and really do things that can elevate the profession, which I think is the goal.

[00:50:54.560] - Speaker 2
What year did you join?

[00:50:56.930] - Speaker 1
1991. It's been a good 32 years.

[00:51:01.490] - Speaker 2
Incredible. How do new partners join? Do they get invited? Is that how it works?

[00:51:09.640] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Generally, we know. You're watching other people's work, and then you might meet them socially because you're at a design conference and you sit down and say, Gee, this is a terrific person. Their work is great. They'd be a good asset to the organization. Sometimes it's somebody you've just worked with on a project and you've for some reason or another, or they bring a special talent like a product designer would, or they were the star of the New York Times being the art director of the magazine like our newest partner, Matt Willey, was. You know them a little bit socially, and you know who they are, and if you like them and they want to join, that's how that happens.

[00:51:52.060] - Speaker 2
Nice. Is the partnership mainly financial, or is there any crossover creatively? Can you ask one of the partners that you think is particularly good at one style of something that's different than your taste and to be involved in something that you're working on or to give you an opinion? Do you ever do that? Is there a crossover?

[00:52:12.210] - Speaker 1
Yeah, there's a lot of it. My partner, Lou Kamen and Emily Oberman, serving, I guess, as art director and designer, have been doing Netflix magazine for months and months, and then they collaborate on an ongoing project. I've collaborated, usually across disciplines, like somebody who doesn't do what I do, I'll collaborate with a product designer, or I collaborated with my partner, Abbott Miller, on some exhibition designs where our talent is really complicated implemented each other. But I'll tell you, graphic design, picking typefaces, that stuff is very personal. That's really hard. Understood. There are areas where you do it very, I think, easily in other areas where you don't.

[00:53:01.040] - Speaker 2
Back to record design from, you designed album covers, and then were you gone by the time the CD came in, or were you still doing CDs?

[00:53:12.410] - Speaker 1
I left when the CD came in. I thought I'd better do book jackets. They were bigger. I'm serious.

[00:53:18.800] - Speaker 2
Really?

[00:53:20.360] - Speaker 1
I don't want to design these little things. It was like somebody shrunk the work. It was silly.

[00:53:25.270] - Speaker 2
It's funny. We went from 12-inch album covers to five-inch CDs three squares to now a thumbnail. It seems like there's an opportunity that no one has yet done. I'm still waiting for it, where we went from this physical object that had to be a certain size, so that was the limitation, and that limitation got smaller. But now in the digital world, we have endless space, but it seems like we're just still doing a thumbnail. It's odd that no one has decided to create the world that's the visual image, the moving visual images, whatever it is, for the collection.

[00:54:07.560] - Speaker 1
Well, I think that's not that difficult to do if you think about it. I mean, it may be that you download a movie with it or you download some film or something that you can either project or that you can look on your TV. What I've noticed is there's a lot of record covers that are back, and it's because people seem to love vinyl. I think part of the experience of vinyl was when you got the new album, you held it and you looked at it and you read the liner notes and you had this other point of relationship so you could really absorb it. But I have my record collection on my iPhone, and when I drive my car, one of my albums come up and I see my little cover, and I'm still happy seeing the little cover on the screen of the car.

[00:54:58.030] - Speaker 2
When you work for a legacy brand like like New York Times or Coca-Cola or Sacks Fifth Avenue, you're one of those big companies, and you're refreshing what they do, how much obligation is there to stick with what's familiar and how far can you go in terms of making it new?

[00:55:17.180] - Speaker 1
There's a lot of tweaking going on. The reason most people change a brand totally is something really bad happened. They got either there was some corporate malfeas or they made a product that was a failure or they're trying to change their image. And that's when you may be hired to do something like that, which is really rare. In the magazine industry, all magazines will change their logos right before they fold it. They were last-ditch effort to save the thing, and then it would go down. A company that's evolving will sometimes tweak their logo to make it look more contemporary. If you look at Michael Beirut's work for Sacks Fifth Avenue, when he first did it, he got rid of a lot of the very florid stuff but stayed with the script because that was inherent in what the company looked like. And they changed his identity since he did it, I think probably about 15 years ago or 10 years ago, I can't remember how long. And they went to something even simpler. So there was this evolution down, and it still looks very contemporary. The thing is that you want it to be recognizable.

[00:56:26.900] - Speaker 1
I don't think the public recognizes on a regular basis these kinds of tweaks. Sometimes if it's radical, it's not a tweak, but they accept them and they recognize the company because you don't want to lose that recognizability. If you change something drastically, it usually means the product's changed, the ownership's changed, the management's changed. Things can really elevate their identity by doing that, tweaking something to a way that you think it's the same thing, but it's not, but it looks more expensive. I mean, that's actually the thing that usually is happening, or more fashionable, or more hip, or more whatever it needs to be to work in its milieu.

[00:57:09.140] - Speaker 2
I believe it was part of Michael Beirut's work with Sacks that The thing that blew my mind was he took the new logo and he cut it into squares and then rearrange the squares so that you couldn't actually read it. But the curves of the letters were so familiar that just by seeing a postage stamp center, you knew what it was.

[00:57:36.400] - Speaker 1
I thought it was brilliant. Beautiful. The new management came and they got rid of it. Wow. Because they actually found it I think, challenging. It has to do with the sensibility of the president of the company and what they're willing to accept. He did all the packaging with it. It was astounding. A really, really wonderful system because you could recognize it, and yet it was modular, and you could You could move it, you could put it, you could make it large, you can make it small, you can make ad campaigns with it. It totally worked. Then somebody just changed it.

[00:58:08.710] - Speaker 2
When you start a new project, how much research do you do in advance?

[00:58:13.920] - Speaker 1
Sometimes I do a lot of research online to see what they are, see who their competitors are. We have a woman, a new business who also gives me some foundation about that. But that's not really when I I'm pitching for the project. When I get the project, where the real research comes from is really interviewing and finding out everybody who's working on it and who had a hand in it and what the history is, and most importantly, what the politics are. The politics of the organization and how decisions are made is going to affect the way you handle and do the job. There's no way around it because you have to know who the key decision maker is and how to begin to organize, how you're going to show and explain work to them. If you're working bottom up, it's a disaster. You want to get to the ultimate decision maker first and work the other way around. Otherwise, you're going to be doing the thing two, three, four, five times and not necessarily making it better. That to me, is what do they do? What do they want to do? Where do they want it to go?

[00:59:25.260] - Speaker 1
Who is the ultimate decision maker? Those are the things I have to know the most of. Then things It's like manufacturing and other stuff that are more technical and executional, which are never political, really.

[00:59:36.080] - Speaker 2
Have you ever pitched just one idea or is it always multiples?

[00:59:41.110] - Speaker 1
I have. Sometimes I have to be just absolutely sure that's going to work. What I do is I have a philosophy. I always show three. I have to determine when I show them, I do more than three, but I have to determine that I'd be happy with each any one of these that they take because I don't want to be designing something I don't respect. So I will generally show one that is pushing a boundary and could be a little scary. One that is more classic to the area it's in, maybe more expected but done better, and one that's somewhere between the two. And I find that That inevitably, nobody picks the middle one. They pick one end or the other. Very rare that they pick the middle one.

[01:00:38.090] - Speaker 2
Interesting. I'm taking that as a good... I think that's a good sign for some reason. That feels like a good... That sounds like good news.

[01:00:46.640] - Speaker 1
I have different strings of luck. Right now, there are a bunch of identities that I really am incredibly pleased with. After doing this all these years, it's hard for me to think, Oh, this is better than other work I've done. But they are. I think some of it is that either the level of client is better, the level of taste of extrication is going up.

[01:01:08.090] - Speaker 2
When a client comes in, is it ever, Here's a new product. We don't even know what the company is called. Give us a name and make a design, or is it always this is what we're called and you make the visual for it?

[01:01:21.690] - Speaker 1
I think I've been involved in naming processes, and it's usually in doing the logo. There might be... Sometimes we hire a consultants who are purely naming consultants because you got to do a lot of research with that. We'll come in with a list of names. I've never had a lot of success with that, to be honest with you. Most people make up their own name and they do a better job with the Shake Shack with Danny Meyer's idea. He had that idea. He'd been wanting to do it for years, and that was his idea. It was a great name. Absolutely great name. The naming thing is good because it protects you from a lot of competition. And I would say probably the name is a consideration on 50% of the startups.

[01:02:06.780] - Speaker 2
How have clients changed since you started till now? Tell me about the people who are the clients. Expectations?

[01:02:18.150] - Speaker 1
I'll tell you what has changed. Time. When I go back to the record industry, we were working with very limited technology technology. That I would produce a record with the recording artist and to figure out what the cover would be, would be a period of maybe two weeks, not more than that, really. Because you wanted to get the album to the printer so it could be released on the schedule. So it meant that you would decide in one or two meetings, and then you would set up a Photoshop or make up for hair, you get an illustrator to do the project, and or you would design the typography or whatever you would do, and they would come in and they generally made some comments and you might do some iterations to it. Then you would typeset it. Then when you typeset it, it would go out to a type house, and it would come back and it would be these pieces of paper that you had to rubber cement down on a board that was called a mechanical. The mechanical was the blueprint for making the album cover. Sometimes you always had a proofreader read the copy, and then the proofreader would find errors in the copy, and there wouldn't be enough time to reset the type.

[01:03:32.700] - Speaker 1
So you would cut in things like exclamation points or commas or things that were left out by hand, and they would be put into the thing, and then they would be photographed and color separated. And that would come out and that would be the album cover. Now, I would say a process of that would take maybe close to a month with the trial and error of the cover and then setting the type and getting the thing out. All of that time, except for the meetings with the client, who is usually the recording artist, was production time. Now, we have all this equipment. We have all these fantastic computers and things. We can show things and demonstrate things. We can do retouching. You We have Photoshop on the thing. We can set the type instantaneously. If the type is all the wrong copy, you can replace it in five seconds. But the things take even more time than they did back in the record days. What do you think is taking all that time? Clients making changes, people's opinion. People come in, they don't give you the right copy. They're lazy. They didn't do the thing.

[01:04:39.150] - Speaker 1
They had seven people look at it and they sent you the wrong thing. Or you had a whole meeting and you had gone through every single piece of whatever it is you're designing on the identity and you show them and then they decide, Oh, no, no, we don't want to do that color. We're going to change it to this. We got to see it this way. And you do the whole thing over again. And they never seem to run out of time. And because you have the equipment and they know you can make the change, why not? I went up to Sony Records, I think, maybe it was 15 years ago, about something or other.

[01:05:13.570] - Speaker 2
Sony, which used to be CBS Records. Now, CBS Records is now Sony Records.

[01:05:18.160] - Speaker 1
It's now Sony Records. It's now Sony Records. Yes. My old company. I went up there. As a matter of fact, they call me all the time because they get calls still for permissions to use some recording artist art. And I think they've assigned me the copyright because they don't know where... They bought the company, but they didn't actually buy the art, and they don't want to deal with it. So that's going on. But I went up there about something else. There were 100 people working in the department. And when I was in the department, we made record covers, we made eight-track tapes, we made cassettes. Sometimes there were operas with librettos. And the department that I worked in, what I personally was responsible was about 150 covers a year. And some of them came in from Nashville. I didn't design them all, but I designed a lot of them. And there were 35 people in our department in total. A lot of them were in the mechanical room, and they're the people that cut out the little commas and stuck them on that, etc. So I asked the art director at Sony. I saw this big department, and I said, How many covers do you guys produce a year?

[01:06:26.770] - Speaker 1
He said, About 150. And I said, But you have 100 people working I said, What do you do with the extra time? I needed to know what I was talking about. Then I realized they're making changes.

[01:06:38.180] - Speaker 2
Yeah, amazing. Tell me about your relationship with typography.

[01:06:43.540] - Speaker 1
I think we moved from a verbal language to a visual language. I think that people recognize type without reading it, that they can recognize a brand without reading the name of the brand, and that it signifies something that they attach to it. I think that's so much what Nike helped us do in that absolutely brilliant 30-year campaign, Biden-Kennedy did. It was progressive But the computer did it as well because they started to have to recognize typefaces. Before, people didn't know what a typeface was. They thought it was the lettering. They didn't even say lettering. That's like the alphabet or the They didn't know it had a name or that there was a serif one and a sand serif one and all of those things. Now, they know all of that. It means that you can shorthand communication in a way you couldn't do before. You can also abstract it. Most of the work I do now has a lot of animation. There are digital signboards outside. I do the public theater in New York City every year, and now it's all digital in the subways, even though there's still the posters, it's digital on the street.

[01:08:01.590] - Speaker 1
These things move, people recognize it, it's type and motion. I'm amazed at what people see and how they know it, what they can understand.

[01:08:12.570] - Speaker 2
Tell me the difference between something still and something moving?

[01:08:16.920] - Speaker 1
When something is still, it's easier for you to recognize the form of it. But once you recognize the form of it, you can stretch it and you can turn it at different different angles. If you go to our website and you look at landmark theaters, you'll see that we did the logo for it as this L that's dimensional, that's drawn in line. And then when we begin to use it with movie graphics inside, like the person who's in the movie, the story who's in the movie, or some image from the movie, we're changing the angle and distorting it. You begin to read it both as an L and as this other moving object, but you understand the object in motion. I don't think people were capable of doing that maybe 30 years ago because it wasn't common enough. I mean, there are always motion graphics in movie titles, but they weren't as daily and as predominant as the motion graphics that exist, say, on Instagram, that people are looking at their iPhone every minute and seeing that stuff. So I think that that's a huge change in visual understanding. That's why I think people recognize type and don't really need to read it.

[01:09:33.460] - Speaker 1
Unless, of course, you're reading an article. I'm not talking about text type. I'm talking about things that are communicating a place or a service or something you need or want. That that telegraphing of information. You can recognize color and form on a sign that might be a gas station without actually reading it. You don't do that anymore. You recognize.

[01:09:58.740] - Speaker 2
Tell me about how you came to work the public theater.

[01:10:02.090] - Speaker 1
This was really right around the time I joined Pentagram. There was a book that came out called New York Design. Before Pentagram, I had my own business called Copel & Share. I had bought pages to promote Copel and Share in this book called Graphic Design, New York. I had done it before I was asked to join Pentagram. So the pages were stood, and my My work was in this book, and I had posters in it. And there was a Trust Elvis poster, which is a classic now. And then there was a poster for a printing company called Ambassador Arts, which is the Big A, was this thing I that was a cut-up A that was put together with Xeroxes. And they were side by side in the book. And George Wolf, who was the director of the theater, saw it and thought he wanted to change the graphics of the public because they had been these classic Paul Davis posters for years, highly recognizable, but he wanted to cleanse the palate. So he changed the identity. The public theater didn't have an identity. They did not have a graphic design identity, didn't have a logo for the place.

[01:11:12.240] - Speaker 1
It was known as the New York Shakespeare Festival or the Joseph Papp Public Theater, but it was never called the public. And that's what we actually did with it and changed the spirit of the theater. And it became very New York, very loud and proud. And I've been doing it for 29 years.

[01:11:29.980] - Speaker 2
Amazing. When I lived in New York, it was always loud and proud. I lived down not far. You really felt the feeling of this is something special just based on... I've never been in. I never went in. But just based on your work, it was ubiquitous in my life and felt substantial. That's branding.

[01:11:53.940] - Speaker 1
That's what that part is. It's graphic design branding. The thing is that the product matched it. They have been the inventor of so many terrific plays and writers and things that have gone to Broadway, whether it's Hamilton or bringing the noise, bringing the funk or hair back in the day. That's the basis of the theater, and they should be loud and proud. They are.

[01:12:19.760] - Speaker 2
What sector of business do you think has the best design? Where do you see the best design in the world?

[01:12:28.250] - Speaker 1
Oh, that's a great question. I think there are fashion brands that have done incredible things and really set standards. And I really admire what Burberry did recently by taking their classic brand that was tired and futsy and then flipping it around so it looks as cool as can be. I mean, I just love that. I thought that Louis Vuitton, their stores and the embrace of the pattern that they already had, fantastic. And I think that there has It's been a trend in fashion branding where good old fashioned graphic design has pushed these brands forward in a way that I never saw before, like the Spanish brand. I think they're Spanish or French. I'm not sure, Loeve. Do you know this brand? Their stuff is so beautiful. It's so well-branded. And it's graphic design in the purest form. So I think that's very terrific. And I I wish it was in more mainstream brands that are sold in Target. I wish that that would happen as well, and I don't see that. At first, I thought Target was terrific because it was a cheap brand that made itself fun, but it seems to have fallen into just a discount store category, and it really should come back up.

[01:13:53.610] - Speaker 1
The tech industry is very erratic. I think that Apple is sensational, and it began with Steve Jobs and seems to have been channeled into the company in their attitude about their packaging, their advertising, and their product. I mean, I just think that they're stupendous that way. Microsoft less so, and they were my client. And some of that is the difference between Steve Jobs and Bill Gates, that Steve Jobs thought he was a titan, and he was an autocrat, and he ruled, and it was top-down, and it works. Top-down does work if you've got obedient forces. But there's a downside to it if you leave or if the company rebels. Gates believed that his business ran better if the engineers who designed the products ran the individual areas. When I worked for them doing Windows 8, there seemed to be anarchy in that. When I for them, I started trying to create a system that would make things be collective, which worked a bit. The Microsoft logo itself comes from the center of this diagram I did that had to do with the relationships of products. So That Windows 8, they had this curvy logo with four boxes.

[01:15:20.700] - Speaker 1
What it did is it put it into perspective because it was off this perspective chart and all the other icons were drawn off of that with the Microsoft logo in the window being flat. That actually took force, but they didn't do the other logos that I drew because they don't talk to each other.

[01:15:37.260] - Speaker 2
No, it's amazing how that accidentally becomes... Because it sounds like you didn't set out to design that part of the design. That's right. You found it within the design.

[01:15:51.990] - Speaker 1
Well, it was funny. When I went there, they had a logo that was in the colors of the Microsoft logo, and it was curvy, if you remember. If you look at what the Windows logo looked like, it had evolved. Originally, somewhere I had this chart of all the Microsoft logos and the Windows logo. The first Windows logo was an eccentric window. It was linear and it had panes that were uneven. Then somebody said, wait a minute, it's got to be in motion. This looks like it's too static. So they made it at an angle. But the angle curved. Then they bit mapped it. So they had like bitmats in it. Then they had this thing that looked like a flag. It had four logos. It was in an angle, but it was a curvy angle, like it was a waving flag. And when I met with them the first time, I said, well, your name is Windows. Why are you a flag? I didn't understand the thing. So that's when I thought that they didn't mean to make a flag. I thought what they were really drawing badly was a window in perspective perspective, because what Windows is as a piece of software is an ability for you to see.

[01:17:06.810] - Speaker 1
You see through the window. And that's an appropriate name for that product. And that the difference between Apple and Microsoft as companies is Apple is top down and Windows is your own perspective. So that it made sense to put the window in perspective. And that's why I did the chart. And that was the whole invention of that thing. They changed for Windows 12, and they brought back in this very dimensional thing that moves that has light coming through it. It's very strange. It was fine. I think it was fine. I think they should have just left it alone. But they didn't But it's still around in its own way. And the center is the logo. I don't know who actually made that the logo because I was long out of there. I think I designed that in, I guess, 2014, 2012, something like that.

[01:18:00.860] - Speaker 2
I'm asking you this question as a partner in Pentagram. How do different designers approach the same project? You can use examples if you want, but think about how would the different people come to find a way to solve a problem, and how different would the results be?

[01:18:19.060] - Speaker 1
We all have our own style, and that there's the part of the process that is getting the client to learn how to see. That before you can even work, you have to set the stage for what's plausible when they explain what they think they need. Sometimes they think they need something, and then you actually need something else. So you have that analytical part of dialog. Michael Beirut can talk anybody into anything. He's just a great salesman in the nicest way. And he makes sports analogies, and he brings things into a language that his clients understand. I could never explain things the way he explains things. So I would act more like a school teacher, and I would show them things and explain why one thing works and one thing doesn't, which is not as compelling, I think, as what he does, but I do it in the most compelling way that I can. And then I think there are two very distinct ways of doing it, and everybody else is somewhere in the middle. And they're all connected to their own personality and the way they want to explain things to clients. For example, my partner, Natasha Jen, is very analytical and very organized.

[01:19:52.880] - Speaker 1
She always makes these very succinct diagrams that explain things to people very clearly. Where I would be uncomfortable doing that because my mind doesn't work that way. You have to find your individual basis of doing that. Then sometimes if you partner with somebody, you may be doing it collectively. Also, I do another form of work, which is environmental graphics, which is over their projects that take a long period of time and don't require the same explaining and selling because they're in an industry that is more about building. In fact, they're more about craft in many ways. They're more like the way we did record covers. If you persuade somebody to looking at something and they think they want to make it and you cost it out and they find out they can make it. It may take four years to build, but it looks exactly like the Photoshop rendering you showed them. Whereas when you do a piece of graphic design, you might start out with something and it comes out totally different at the end because of the client relationship.

[01:20:57.440] - Speaker 2
Give me an example of environmental design Okay.

[01:21:01.750] - Speaker 1
You've seen the public theater. You've seen the building, there's the outside of the building and the inside of the building. There are graphics all over the place, and they're built into the walls, and they're the logos of the place. And there are objects there, and there's an awning that comes out, and there's a big word public on the top of the awning. It's signs. It's signs and spaces. In New York City, I've done Symphony Space, which has complicated graphics, New 42nd Street Studio. There are a lot of them in different places. They exist in the insides of lobbies of buildings. There's a terrazza floor that I designed that's in a hotel in Fort Lauderdale that's 8,000 feet, and it's a map of Fort Lauderdale, and you walk over it and stuff like that. That's part of the genre.

[01:21:49.270] - Speaker 2
What is the relationship between design and architecture in general?

[01:21:54.260] - Speaker 1
Well, architects tend to be my clients. It really depends upon how you're brought into the project. I met Jim Polshek, who owned a design firm that was Polchek Partners, that has changed its name to ENIAD later when he became old and was retiring. They They're an architecture firm that do a lot of wonderful things like museums. They did the Center for Earth and Space at the Museum of Natural History in New York City. That was probably the first big building I signed. And I I met Jim in the lobby at the public theater many years ago, and this was before we did the major renovation of the lobby. But he had to put up something quickly because George Wolf had hired him at the same time, or he was there at the same time I was doing the new graphics. And he saw them and he liked them because they were constructivists, and he likes that, period. And he says, I know, let's just cover the place with this stuff. And we hung things on the wall and made banners. And that was the first time I was an environmental graphic designer. So it happens in connection to a place because This is part of the personality of it.

[01:23:02.940] - Speaker 1
It's very exciting work. It just takes really long.

[01:23:06.810] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the maps.

[01:23:08.280] - Speaker 1
For a long time, I did these sarcastic and fractured paintings of information that were small that I did for New York Times pieces. I made a diagram of a blog thread, or I did some information about Bill Clinton's, I don't know, whatever was going on with him at the time, the Monica Lewinsky stuff and his America and who supported him, who didn't. And they were political, and I got used to do it in newspapers. And somewhere, I think around 1998, I think it was when I started working for City Bank, and I was really just doing straight corporate work for a period of about six years with some other work that was more interesting. And I thought, I'm at I'd say that stuff that I paint, the little things that I paint for the newspapers, would be good if it was really big. So I did a painting of the world. We have a house in Salisbury, Connecticut, and there's space. And I unrolled some canvas and I painted the world. And I put all this information and it looked... I painted the world inaccurately and left things out and didn't care and wrote my version of everything.

[01:24:27.290] - Speaker 1
And that was my painting. And then I I began to do them even bigger. And as I was doing them, I thought, well, maybe this is really a thing. Then I had a friend who had a gallery, and he told me to bring my paintings in and show it to the gallery, which I did, and they gave me a show, and it was a success. So I've been doing it ever since. We make prints of the paintings, and we sell the prints as well as the paintings. And Recently, I was commissioned to paint a whole Porsche, a 1977 Porsche. And it's covered, it's a United States map. It's upside down going around the car because one side of the car is the Canadian border and the other side of the car goes down to the bottom of Texas, so it's wrapping it. It's in an exhibit I'm having actually in Munich in a museum called Pinacoteca. Dertek, Moderna, and it's all my typography, including the car.

[01:25:35.580] - Speaker 2
Incredible. Are you going?

[01:25:37.630] - Speaker 1
Yep. Beautiful.

[01:25:39.190] - Speaker 2
You talked about the size of the pieces getting bigger. Talk about the size of art and why size impacts our relationship to the pieces that we see?

[01:25:50.070] - Speaker 1
That's a really interesting question. I'm not quite sure how it works. The thing is that I know what happened with my own paintings is that people seem to marvel at the scale of the painting in relationship to the density of the information. The thing is that the information is often, it's mostly inaccurate. I mean, I saw somebody, there was a giant painting I did of the United States. It was at the Cooper Hewitt for about six months. And there were two men. I walked in one day, and there were two men describing a road trip they took. And they were navigating themselves across the country on a road that was in the wrong spot. And it was It wasn't deliberately in the wrong spot. I just messed up. They're right. The information is right because it's generally correct. It wasn't like I was drawing a road from Taiwan in the middle of the United States. It was just that I had the wrong route number on it. Yeah, that was probably the road he took, but not the route number.

[01:26:49.590] - Speaker 2
They're poetic maps.

[01:26:52.730] - Speaker 1
They're opinionated also. They're very political, mostly. I get my frustrations out that way. I had done a map that was I had the last total show I had where I was doing one thing throughout. It was really repainting the United States a million times with all kinds of demographic information. And I am very politically obsessed. I am a news junkie, and I am really interested in how Americans think and what their value structures are, which I don't understand anymore. And I keep trying to find some commonality. But I find that just different parts of the nation are really, really different when you do the research. How we're in one nation is, I guess, that's why there's Europe. Maybe that's how that happened. Maybe the United States is where Europe was when it all became different city states. I don't know. Could be.

[01:27:50.420] - Speaker 2
How has your relationship to design changed over the course of your life?

[01:27:55.660] - Speaker 1
I started out not knowing what being a designer meant. And I learned it on the job. And I began to find my own method of communicating and building on a language that I see people respond to and use. And I love it all, I have to say. I love the things that I do that are personal, but I also love the things that I do that are really public. I never tire of finding out somebody saw something or was influenced by something or that it was out there and that I could make that happen. I think we're all very lucky when we can do those things.

[01:28:42.920] - Speaker 2
It's amazing that we get to make creative things and people like them, and it ends up being our job. It's wild. It's a wild that the world works the way it does.

[01:28:54.830] - Speaker 1
No, I think the notion to be able to love love what you do is so fantastic. So many people don't. I find that I appreciate it more as I get older and find myself not feeling like I'm repeating myself and not feeling anything but limber in it. And that's great.

[01:29:22.640] - Speaker 2
Great. How important is it to break new ground and create something new? How important is newness?

[01:29:30.080] - Speaker 1
I think newness is relative. There are no real... I'm trying to think of the last great originator. I think Vincent Mango made something that nobody was making. That's new. I think it's very difficult to do that now because there's so much. What I do think is that you move things forward and you make discoveries, usually through a mistakes, that you're doing something and you've made a terrible mistake and you stop, and then you realize there's a possibility, and then you can play with it and move it forward, and sometimes you stretch your form. That's really what I'm always trying to do is stretch the form.

[01:30:19.630] - Speaker 2
That's an interesting thing about mistakes and accepting mistakes. Some people's egos wouldn't allow the mistake to be the good thing. We have to be really open-minded to accept the mistake as better than what we were trying to do.

[01:30:35.980] - Speaker 1
Do you think that's hard for people, really?

[01:30:38.240] - Speaker 2
Well, I think there are some people who, if it doesn't feel like it's coming, they have the idea. For some people, it's more intellectual. They have the idea and they want to execute the idea. Anything that gets in the way of executing that idea is not good.

[01:30:56.470] - Speaker 1
Well, that's actually self-defeating. For sure. I I remember- We're in the same boat. Years ago, Michael Bayrouh said to me, he was working on something and he said, I have this really idea, but I can't get it to work. And I looked at it and I said, maybe it's not a good idea. I mean, that's Sometimes you think you do, but that actually is not going to work for you because there's probably something fundamentally wrong with the thinking in it. It's creating an impossibility that's either going to be too difficult. I mean, in the end, I think all our best work actually should seem so easy because that's the hard part is making it making it easy.

[01:31:37.130] - Speaker 2
Almost as if it happened itself.

[01:31:38.670] - Speaker 1
Exactly. It should have designed itself.

[01:31:42.370] - Speaker 2
Tell me about timely work versus timeless work?

[01:31:45.970] - Speaker 1
Everything is done in its own time. I mean, you can't. There are principles that never change. Usually, if something isn't working, it's because the scale relationships aren't right. There's It's a a dynamism that's existed as long as people have been pushing paint on paper or making anything in some form because it's the relationship. If you do something that's very extreme or something that's very withheld and quiet, they're going to work. It's the middle that's the bad place.

[01:32:22.630] - Speaker 2
You were part of the Design Commission for New York for a period of time. What's that like? It's amazing that it exists. I'm happy that it exists. What were the things that you guys would do?

[01:32:34.510] - Speaker 1
Actually, this was... Bloomberg changed the name of it. It used to be called the Art Commission. He changed to the Design Commission. It used to be a commission that was not run by professionals. It was contributors to political campaigns that got appointed to give somebody a nice position in New York City. Theoretically, the role of the committee, and it's called a commission, I was Commissioner Cher for a period of six years. I like being Commissioner. You were looking... Why not? It's another sidebar.

[01:33:09.350] - Speaker 2
If not you, who?

[01:33:14.210] - Speaker 1
James Paul Rzeczek invited me to be on the commission. He was the head of the commission. There was a wonderful engineer named Guy Nordstrom, another wonderful fine artist named Brian Kim. Signe Nielsen, a landscape architect, was on the And we were all design professionals. Our job was to look at new buildings and renovations and things that were on New York public land and on public property and to make sure that these things were designed well and would serve the city. And Bloomberg was a design mayor. When I designed the High Line, he had just become mayor, and he was the one that made that thing go, which was great when we were working on the highline back in the day. I was working with Robert Hammond and Joshua David, who started a thing, and I did their identity. And then there was a book about it, and the book needed somebody in politics to sign on it. They had Martha Stewart and they had Mike Bloomberg, but they were both business people. Then 9/11 happened and Bloomberg was elected mayor. And then all of a sudden, we pulled the book off press and put it back, and it was mayor Mike Bloomberg, and he had endorsed the thing.

[01:34:37.510] - Speaker 1
And then all of a sudden, all city government began moving to make this thing become a real thing.

[01:34:42.910] - Speaker 2
So beautiful.

[01:34:44.440] - Speaker 1
And he did so much incredible work with parks. He appointed a great parks Commissioner, and her name was Betsey Smith, and she's now at the Central Park Conservancy. And they really were rebuilding parks all over the city. And The Design Commission was there to look at things like that and also things like bus shelters. At that point in time, the new bus shelters were developed. The goal was that New York was full of terrific designers and architects, and they should be getting the jobs, and they should be doing the work, and the work should be enhancing and pulling up New York so that we would sit, we would go down. There would be about three-hour sessions for a morning once a week. The people who are working on the projects and the city agencies agencies that were supporting them would come and they would present to the Design Commission. And it was our job to approve or to recommend and then approve or to try to help these things get better and move through the city. It wasn't about necessarily saving money. It was really about the design of these things. It was really, really interesting.

[01:35:52.060] - Speaker 1
And I think I was lucky because the commission was so terrific. And I think we did a lot to make things better.

[01:36:01.630] - Speaker 2
Sounds beautiful. I'm happy you got to do that. It's great.

[01:36:05.550] - Speaker 1
It was great. It was fun.

[01:36:07.310] - Speaker 2
We haven't spoke since the Creative Act was released, and I just want to thank you for helping it be all that it is. People seem to like it, and the design is working. I just want to thank you for being so helpful and making something that people seem to resonate with.

[01:36:26.540] - Speaker 1
Well, they were your choices, Rick. You're the star of that book. I was just the facilitator, but you made great choices. I mean, it was interesting to me working with you on it because you made choices I would not have made. You made them from a very different place than I would probably be coming from. I mean, the book is interesting because it's very classical, but it does have a contemporary edge, and that's the terrific thing about it. I probably would have much more contemporary with it, but it wouldn't have had the richness that was brought to it by the classicism in it. Cool.

[01:37:08.620] - Speaker 2
Well, thank you. Great seeing you as always.

[01:37:13.310] - Speaker 1
Fantastic. Thank you. This is fun.
