[00:00:07.740] - Speaker 3
Tétragrammaton. It's interesting, the last time that we were together for my birthday was 30 years ago.

[00:00:29.310] - Speaker 1
You mentioned Yeah.

[00:00:30.750] - Speaker 2
I was turning 30, and I could do anything I want for my 30th birthday. I was working on Chili Pepper's album at the time, and Anthony said, I'll go with you wherever you want to go. I said, Well, Nan Chanel is my favorite band, Let's go hang out with Trent. And we came to New Orleans. The only time I've ever been in New Orleans was to visit you there. And you had a studio in a... Was it a mortuary?

[00:00:54.940] - Speaker 1
It had been a funeral home in years past. Not chosen for for that reason.

[00:01:00.660] - Speaker 2
It just happened.

[00:01:01.710] - Speaker 1
Yeah, just a lucky coincidence. That's crazy. 30 years ago.

[00:01:06.520] - Speaker 2
Yeah. How long are you in New Orleans for?

[00:01:10.710] - Speaker 1
I moved to New Orleans '91, I believe. I'd been living in Cleveland. And Cleveland was about an hour and 45 minutes from where I grew up. And it was a city with the strongest magnetic pole nearby. And that's where the band launched out of, and I had an opportunity to work in studios and hone. It was a place you wanted to escape from. And I'd come up with a plan to Early 20s realizing, I know what I want to do, but I don't know how to get to where I want to be. Cleveland served its purpose for five, six, seven, eight years I was there. When the band got signed, we started touring. We toured for pretty much a solid year and a half, from beginning of '90 to fall of '91. At some point, I came back to Cleveland, and it was winter and depressing, and the front door of the apartment was open when I pulled up.

[00:02:20.390] - Speaker 2
Bad sign.

[00:02:21.200] - Speaker 1
It felt like the city... I think I was hoping for some hero's return, which it wasn't. It was the opposite of that. I thought, Fuck this. I'd just seen the country for the first time ever. New Orleans seems like such a weird and foreign place to what I'd grown up with, just through tradition, the way it looked, everything.

[00:02:47.350] - Speaker 2
Had you been there before?

[00:02:49.360] - Speaker 1
Just on tour, going through town and just saying, What in the world place is this? I didn't have any home, really, at that point. I just drove to New Orleans and found an apartment and enjoying living there and stay there for 13 years, I think.

[00:03:06.200] - Speaker 2
And did you move to Cleveland from Pennsylvania for a step up? It was like moving to a bigger community. What was the thinking?

[00:03:14.570] - Speaker 1
We're I grew up is a little town called Mercer. That's about an hour north of Pittsburgh. And it was, there was one school. That's where you went, the school. Two traffic lights in Amish Dutch country, remote. And what it ingrained in you was a sense that you belong here and you're not going to get out of here. Not fully defeat us, but you could see your path ahead of you. You could see what 10 years from now look like when you're in high school. The signs of giving up and resignation and a job that wasn't really what you wanted in a mortgage. That's what everyone was. My family didn't have... We didn't have any money.

[00:04:03.480] - Speaker 2
Do you have brothers or sisters?

[00:04:06.250] - Speaker 1
I have one sister that's five years younger than me. When I was five, my parents split up, and for whatever reason, I went with my mom's parents. I was raising my grandparents. My sister, who was just born, was with my mom. My dad was out of the picture. This is in a town where you could drive from one the other town to the other in five minutes. We'd see each other, but I was with grandparents. And I think some... I mean, as I look back at that time, it wasn't unhappy, but it infused in me something that said You're not really good enough. You don't really fit in. And I fight that as I've matured into something else that feels much more confident in a lot of ways. At my core, there's a voice in there that's saying that. I felt it walking in here. Wow. Amazing. It's not from not being loved or any shit like that.

[00:05:16.080] - Speaker 2
Do you think it's the place or the nature of what happened with your parents to analyze where it's coming from?

[00:05:25.880] - Speaker 1
There's probably some abandonment issues in there. There's It's a sense of if you want to get somewhere, you have to figure out how to do it yourself and get there. Self-reliance, I would imagine. My grandfather, who I love more than anybody in the world, who lived to be 99, Great, great person, but also was a very conservative in terms of not his worldview of his life actions. Take the safe route, provide, don't take the risky job. Frugal, but happy.

[00:06:06.100] - Speaker 2
Do you feel like he was afraid or just content?

[00:06:11.790] - Speaker 1
I didn't sense fear from him. Probably content. There was an interesting thing that happened years later. Now, I'm living in New Orleans. I'm in a nice house in the Garden district, and the ridiculous community of the Garden district has an event once a year where they, I don't know if it's a fundraiser or what it is, but somebody's house gets chosen, and then all the old money, ridiculous characters that live in the Garden district come by And so good friend of mine, it's like a mother figure of mine down there, was connected in the town. And, hey, we're going to... Why don't we do at your house? And let's just do it up. And so we did. And I invited my grandfather to come down, and I got to see a side of him I hadn't seen before, which was like, Trent, I don't know. What would have... That's not my people. Well, how would I fit in? I said, look, fuck those people. It's our party. I brought him down, got him a tuxedo. Felt confident. Of course, he was the life of the party, and had a good time. But witnessing that made me think about that transferred into me, and in some fashion.

[00:07:31.380] - Speaker 2
What I'm hearing is like he saw himself as an outsider in some way.

[00:07:36.600] - Speaker 1
I think so. I never saw that in him growing up. But as I've wondered where some of this comes from, I would imagine some of that got transferred. But to get to your point, I went up in Cleveland because no one in my family has ever gone to college. And by the time I was smart in school, but I lost interest in that. I was more interested in playing music and trying to figure out how to express myself. I knew what I wanted to do. I wanted to be in a band, and I wanted to be on stage. But there was no clear path of how one would attain that. There's no one you knew, you didn't know anybody that ever had made, got on the other side of the TV set. I went to college for a year, close by to where I lived for a computer engineering because I'm good at math. And I thought, well, maybe I can design recording consoles or some fucking thing. Of course, I don't want to really do that. And I thought while I was in school, I was around people that really love to do calculus all day, and we're into it.

[00:08:46.780] - Speaker 1
And I could do it, but I don't love to do it. And I thought, I need to really figure out. I need to actually try. When I'm 30, I want to at least say I gave it my best shot, and then I know. And then I know. Anyway, that led me on a path that I wound up in Cleveland because it was... From my limited experience in the world, it felt fertile, and there were some people doing some interesting things, and it was clubs to play in, and there was original bands performing, and it felt like something. It was easy to get to, and I wound up sucked into that scene, and that's how I there.

[00:09:30.590] - Speaker 2
Do you remember what the music was that you were listening to back when you were at home with your grandparents? What was the music that made you want to make music?

[00:09:37.730] - Speaker 1
I think when I was five, my grandma made me take piano lessons. We a shitty, upright piano. It didn't take long before I could tell I was good at playing piano. It triggered something in me where I felt connected. I felt like... I felt a sense of worth from being able to play well. Within a few years, let's say by the time I was 10 or so, 11, My piano teacher I was studying with just down the street was, you might want to consider getting tutored and considering becoming a concert pianist, which would mean a lot more practice sing and dropping out of school, perhaps, if you want to take this seriously, I think you have what it takes to... And that didn't sound like it was any fun because around that time, I was probably a little bit older. It was girls were becoming interesting. The record in particular, the band Kiss, seemed like too good to be true. It was exciting. It was taboo. It felt larger than life. It felt, I didn't know you could do that. It felt like you might get in trouble if you had the Hotter Than Hell album.

[00:11:13.100] - Speaker 1
It was just everything about it.

[00:11:14.450] - Speaker 2
Were you 14, 13, like that?

[00:11:16.640] - Speaker 1
I must have been... It's about puberty, so 13-ish, right in that range. It just clicked that, I want to be in a band. I want to do that. I couldn't get enough music. It It's strange to think about how we consume music back then, the choices that one made. I'm able to have these physical records, which is how I'm going to hear music other than FM radio, that I'm going to tape on on a cassette tape player. And the choice is one made. I had a life-changing experience. National Record Mart was the store in the mall that was 15 minutes away from where I grew up. I'd love just go and I remember walking in there and hearing something that was like, What is this? It was Frank Zappa, Chic, Your Booty album had come out, filled with profanity. They'd put the cover of the album they're playing up on the counter when they're playing it. It just felt like, I don't understand what I'm hearing, but, wow, man. If I could just get that out, but it was a double album. The joy of discovery, the joy of commitment, bringing in something home and then spending time with it, thinking about it, not being overwhelmed with content or information.

[00:12:37.230] - Speaker 1
I didn't know what most of the artists looked like that I even liked, but I knew what the inside liner notes were. I knew if someone wrote something etched on the vinyl. That canvas of enjoying art, I miss. It had a big impact on me because it was...

[00:12:55.500] - Speaker 2
Yeah, me too.

[00:12:56.290] - Speaker 1
That's all I wanted to do.

[00:12:56.840] - Speaker 2
That's all we had was that narrow little sliver. Yeah. Like just these little bits of information is all we had to go on.

[00:13:04.220] - Speaker 1
Yeah, but it was enough. I have the Hotter Than Hell album, but my friend has destroyer, and let's swap. All that stuff. I look back fondly at that era of appreciation and how much it shaped me, getting stuck with an album or Columbia Record Club. Too good to be true. Thirteen albums for never mind you're going to pay twice the price if you forget to send the card back in, which I did. But I remember getting a Billy Joel album that I didn't want, 52nd Street. But I listened to the shit out of it because I paid full price for it, and I liked it. I drilled it into my head.

[00:13:52.900] - Speaker 2
Probably made you a better songwriter.

[00:13:54.690] - Speaker 1
Yeah. There's some Barry Manalows in there along the way, all kinds of things I think in today's era of hitting skip or shuffle, you miss that learning curve. A lot of my favorite albums I didn't understand at first. I don't know if I would spend the time now.

[00:14:17.020] - Speaker 2
Would you play along? If you heard something you liked, would you play along on the piano, learn the songs?

[00:14:21.830] - Speaker 1
Yeah, my dilemma at the time was, I was a keyboard player. I never studied how to play guitar, and my brain doesn't work that way. I need linear, makes sense, but frets, it's another dimension that doesn't quite resonate. I played saxophone and I played piano, and I didn't have access to a synthesizer yet, but the idea of electronics was exciting to me. I think that what my dad came back into my life around this time, and he played in country rock bands, and that was always something that was exciting to me. I could go to band practice once in a while and watch what they're up to.

[00:15:10.940] - Speaker 2
What did he play in the band?

[00:15:12.380] - Speaker 1
He played fiddle and guitar.

[00:15:16.080] - Speaker 2
What was it like when he came back?

[00:15:19.110] - Speaker 1
Well, he never really left, but his role in my life changed. I can't say it wasn't fatherly as much as it was uncle, big brother. He was young when he had me. He was 17 when I was born. We are good friends today. He's provided that catalyst thing that's shifted my trajectory over the years. He bought me an electric piano, a Wurlitzer. So that often with a distortion pedal, an MXR distortion and a phase shifter. That was my rate. But I noticed if you played fourths and stuff and put a fuzz pedal on it, it sounded tough. It had an energy to it. I was more excited about rock music than, say, Super Tramp, which I also did like and do like. But I was fascinated with electronics. When a band like The Cars came along that I thought married clever, great songwriting with interesting use of keyboards that I hadn't heard before, not just in a playing a pad behind shit, faking strings, but as a lead instrument sometimes and part of a puzzle of arrangement that I thought was really exciting. That led to while in high school, getting a great present of a cheap mug synthesizer.

[00:16:52.030] - Speaker 1
And then I knew what I wanted to do. I wanted to make music that could have the aggression that I liked rock music, but incorporated in electronics somehow. I think a little bit later, huge thing happened when I went to college. I was only 45 minutes away from where I grew up, but there was a college radio station there. It was right at 1983, when, if you liked electronic music, synth pop had exploded. There was a hundred bands I'd never heard before.

[00:17:32.010] - Speaker 2
Like Deepesh Mode and...

[00:17:34.240] - Speaker 1
Depeche Mode to XTC to Heaven 17. Just a lot of shit. A lot of sigals. All that stuff that ranged from corny and poppy to the world of literate college radio, beard scratching type, you know what I mean? I just felt like I couldn't... It was almost too much to take in, going from a '25 record collection to having your mind blown by all this music. And I got sucked into playing in a band in college where I was just the keyboard player that could sing some stuff, and some This is strange. I feel defensive even saying this, but in that world, if you were in a band, you played cover songs and you played in places. We played cover songs, and it was honing chops, but it wasn't songwriting.

[00:18:30.370] - Speaker 2
But you can get good playing cover songs.

[00:18:33.930] - Speaker 1
Certainly learned a lot.

[00:18:36.010] - Speaker 2
Absolutely.

[00:18:37.320] - Speaker 1
Unfortunately, some people did have video cameras back then. But anyway, it got me to a point over the next few years where now I'm about 22-ish. I'm living in Cleveland. I'm working in a shop that sells synthesizers and drum machines, hearing people make noise on that shit all day, and then going home and trying to get excited about. Wound up getting a job in a recording studio from a guy that I was selling gear to in the store. In It was just a rinky-dink three-person operation. The deal was I could stay up all night if I wanted to after they were done and learn how things work or work on demos as long as I'd do anything else. So I was an expert at wiping pee off the toilet seat, waxing floors. Again, if you didn't want to do it, I'm the guy. But I had pathologized prints at that time and was heavily into 1999 era. Purple Rain was coming out or had come out.

[00:19:54.820] - Speaker 2
At that time, he was playing mostly everything himself, yes?

[00:19:58.010] - Speaker 1
Yeah. And it It filled in me a sense of... One of the things I marveled out with him was how realized he seemed as an artist. I could identify a song of his by the guitar playing, or the vocal or the drum programming. He felt like it may not be virtuosity and all those things, but it was in point of view. Around that same time, I was being I was realizing I'm wasting my time playing in other people's bands because what I'm really doing is trying to appear busy, recurring theme in my life, avoiding something that's scary because I'm afraid. And what I was afraid of then was finding out that I don't have anything to say. I know if I like something or don't like something, but something my piano teacher told me that haunted me in a way, because I hadn't really thought about it, was a great performer doesn't mean a great artist. A great executor doesn't mean a great composer. It's obvious, but I hadn't really thought of it that way. And part of me was thinking, what if I find out I'm a shitty writer? And I thought at the time, if I do find that out, then maybe my lot is to be an executor.

[00:21:27.990] - Speaker 1
Maybe I'm a performer and interpreter or maybe I'm... I don't know. But I didn't want to find that out. So a way of not finding that out was not finding out, just avoiding it by feeling busy. Anyway, I started to think I could recognize I was doing that and thought, I'm working at this studio. I have this opportunity. I've got a 24-track tape machine. A vague idea of how it works. There's a room full of keyboards here. I can't find anybody, really, that... I can't find that you two, other three people that become the puzzle, the chili peppers, the rolling stones, which I wanted because it would also made it easier, I thought. It would have felt like I found a club, finally, that I haven't been able to find, and I couldn't find anybody. Then I thought, Well, Prince can do it. Fuck it, I'll try to do it. Through trial and error, it started to take shape into something that felt like it revealed what it was I had to say.

[00:22:42.480] - Speaker 3
Welcome to the house of Macadeo, macadamias. Macadamias are a delicious superfood, sustainably sourced directly from farmers. Macadamias, a rare source of omega-7, linked to collagen regeneration, enhanced weight management, and better fat metabolism. Macadamias, are healthy and brain-boasting fats. Macadamias, paleo friendly, keto and plant-based. Macadamias. No wheat, no dairy, no gluten, no GMOs, no preservatives, no palm oil, no added sugar. House of Macadamias. Rye, roast it with Namibian sea salt, cracked black pepper, and chocolate dips. Snack bars come in chocolate, coconut white chocolate and blueberry white chocolate. Visit houseofmacadamias. Com/tetra.

[00:23:59.020] - Speaker 2
How long did it take before you started feeling like this is something? Or did you ever feel that?

[00:24:07.050] - Speaker 1
The first things I tried writing were shitty, and they were shitty because I was posturing. I wasn't being honest with myself, and I was trying to play a role, and I was put up a shield, and I'm going to write political clash-like songs. Because I like the clash. I don't really have anything to say or even care that much about deeply on an experiential level. Obviously, it sounded like that. No one heard these things, but I knew. I think a really pivotal thing happened where I'm in Cleveland. I was playing in a band called Exotic Birds. It's all original material. I didn't write any of it. I thought it wasn't bad at the time, but I was getting frustrated with just the band, and it wasn't what I wanted to do, really. I've got to do my own thing. When I said that, the manager of the band at the time had become a friend, John Mall, he said, I'm also going to tap out because for whatever his reasons were, felt like it ran its course. He said, Just please keep me in touch with what you're up to because I think you have talent.

[00:25:36.060] - Speaker 1
And as I was working on these songs in the studio at night, and I had Chris Frenna, who was my good friend, right-hand man drummer confident. We weren't sitting jamming together, creating music. But it could be, does this suck? No, it doesn't suck. That's all I needed. Or, it sucks.

[00:26:01.110] - Speaker 2
A friend with taste that you thought was at least-yes.give you some barometer.

[00:26:06.420] - Speaker 1
Kept me sane and was a good friend and did have good taste. It was his insistence of I remember when Daila Soul's 3ft High and Rising came out. He was working at a record shop, and he brought it home because he'd get promos of everything, and we put it on. We're looking at each other like, What the fuck is this? This could be the worst thing I've ever... They can't do that, can they? Was that a fucking French demo of some sort? You're not allowed to do that. It puzzled me in a way that was... But it was him saying, You know what? I'll listen to that record again without you, man. I'm going to put it on. We got to listen to that again. And I realized, You're right, man. I didn't understand it.

[00:26:56.850] - Speaker 2
You didn't have any context for it. That's the beauty of the early hip hop stuff. It's like it really did come from outer space.

[00:27:02.990] - Speaker 1
Yeah, you can't do that. Anyway, sitting in that studio, there was another thing going on with me, which was... Just felt sad. I think it had been a theme in my life, but somehow it had been coming to the forefront of I feel, I feel sad. I have to get this out somehow. I realized I've been writing journals not as lyrics, just not so that someone's going to find them. I don't know why I was doing it. Then as I looked at them, I realized, they are lyrics. But I could never play that for somebody because that wasn't a character.

[00:27:49.230] - Speaker 2
No, and that was really personal.

[00:27:51.350] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I thought, as an experiment, let me see where it goes. I remember something I could never have was one of those songs. I don't even know if I let Chris in there when I was singing that one. But I had goosebumps when I was working on it. It got to a point where that and a couple of other songs that were in that realm of, I think these are really powerful, but I can't let anyone hear them because they feel too intimate.

[00:28:30.250] - Speaker 2
Yeah, it's so vulnerable.

[00:28:32.260] - Speaker 1
And I gave them to John, and then I'm like, okay, seal it. I had to leave. He immediately got back to me. He's like, this is power here. This is it. You know, whatever you're tapping into, that has truth to it. And, no, I realized it, too. And that became the internal blueprint with, I'll deal with exposure at a later point, but let's just see where this leads. And that's what led to the idea of Nine Inch Nails, and certainly the first album. And that whole time was about a year. First song to maybe 18 months, something like that, of refining things, trying to figure out what the project has to say, what my role in it, how naked am I in there? I felt like, I wish I was Jean Simmons with a costume I could put on that felt like armor that I could...

[00:29:42.860] - Speaker 2
A mask to hide behind.

[00:29:44.490] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Because where it got uncomfortable then, I'll jump past the point of getting a record deal and going to war with the producer I had on that album and then turning it in and having the record label say, This is an abortion. I believed in it, but I have never put a record out. Of course.

[00:30:10.260] - Speaker 2
Was there any point during the process from the complete vulnerability and discomfort with how vulnerable it was, as you got deeper into making it, was there a point where you felt like not thinking about how people are going to react, thinking about how it gets dressed up like kiss, but I'm on to something and this is getting good. And did it get easier to do as you were doing it or no? Was it always a fight?

[00:30:42.980] - Speaker 1
Once that initial spark happened, I think I've cracked the code of what it is. This is what it is. Then it was wildly exciting because now I have an idea of the shape of what the form is.

[00:31:02.800] - Speaker 2
You're not stabbing in the dark anymore.

[00:31:04.500] - Speaker 1
Not as much. Now I can try edges and see where it starts to feel right with this, not blueprint, but sense of I guess the second guessing got a little easier because I thought, I'm going to lean into this thing, and I'm going to see where it goes, and I'm going to... I learned at that point, there's a time for being editorial later, not right now. And That all felt exciting. But it was always on a layer of thin ice because all of it is a construct in my head. There is no audience.

[00:31:42.080] - Speaker 2
There's no- The song's coming every week? Or how long would it be between songs at that time?

[00:31:49.580] - Speaker 1
I'd say every couple of weeks, there was a new starting point. But what I would do, unlike what I would do now, is thinking back to that first album experience. What I didn't have was someone like you in my life. And what I mean by that is a nurturing role with it, mentor, Helping you, helping support you in making the best thing you could make that was the thing that you wanted to make, the best version of it, and give you the confidence to go as deep as you could go into whatever that thing was. That's exactly right. What I had was a version of that with John Malm, my first manager, who was not coming at this like, How can we maximize profit and audience and commercial? Or something like that. Do what you need to do. Let's, you know, pointing out that is the shit, lean into that. Fighting to try to find, unsuccessful, the right home for it, but no understanding of how to go about doing anything. Anyway, around how the songs were coming. I remember when I met you a while later, and it was, tips on strategies, keep writing, write lots of songs, write stuff.

[00:33:20.110] - Speaker 1
And so and so has 100 songs that's always waiting. I thought, 100 fucking songs? I've written 14 songs. You've heard All of them, 12 of them. You know what I mean?

[00:33:33.130] - Speaker 2
You might have played 13 and 14 that night, too.

[00:33:36.010] - Speaker 1
Yeah, because maybe that's true. I would refine and refine and refine rather than You know what I mean?

[00:33:46.770] - Speaker 2
I didn't- You didn't- I wasn't thinking- You were more obsessively concerned with any little tweak you could do on one instead of thinking, Well, I could write five more songs, and maybe one of them will be even better this one, I wouldn't have to tweak it. You never know until you get all of them out.

[00:34:04.270] - Speaker 1
I hadn't even thought about that.

[00:34:07.020] - Speaker 2
You never know. Do you remember at that time was the music the thing that led it? In other words, would you have a musical track and then see which of the diary-like words would work, or did it ever start with the words?

[00:34:25.650] - Speaker 1
There were usually two things happening separate. And then at an unknown moment. I can't remember it ever being a planned. Now is the time where I take the ideas and match them up.

[00:34:39.850] - Speaker 2
So you'd be writing poetry, essentially? Yeah. And then you'd be working on instrumental tracks?

[00:34:44.730] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Seeing what was exciting in the world of music because that was also an unknown. I didn't know if it was... Like I said, I didn't have the band that was helping define that sound. It could be anything. At some point, if somewhat organically, as I recall, there would be, Hey, that feels like it goes with that. I think subconsciously, I had been thinking that, but I didn't- But didn't know you were thinking about it. No. Later in life now, I've done much more... The thing I have The thing that feels strange to me now is not to jump ahead to the- That's fine.

[00:35:21.460] - Speaker 2
Feel free.

[00:35:22.280] - Speaker 1
To the later stage of your story. We have no rules. I work with Atticus a lot. A lot of what it allows me do is there's a mode I get in where I'm not thinking. I'm in a zone, and I'm not being editorial consciously. I'm not analyzing what's happening. I'm just feeling where I'm at. A lot of times we'll do this with films, where what I find exciting about working on film as a side job is, here's a scenario that needs to feel a certain way. I like inhabiting where I think that character is, and it's refreshing that it's not me. It's not my voice. It's not my story in a variation of the same story or something. Here's a guy over here feels like a new thing or a person or whatever it might be. Just being able to social network with Fincher, when it was presented to us as a job with no formal training in how to score a film, I've seen a lot of films. I know I don't like the music in a lot of films, and some I do. Most, I don't even pay attention to. I'm just lost in a film, I think.

[00:36:45.840] - Speaker 1
What I know I don't know how to do is score an eight-second scene of someone walking upstairs. Is that a chorus? You know what I mean? Yeah. Does that a melody go in there? Should it need to be in time. And what was fun to do with that project, having no idea how to approach it. And here's a film, it's not about vistas and battles in outer space, journeys or canvases where lots of sound can sit. It's just people talking the whole time, arguing. And I don't know what music would... Is there even room for music in there? Once you started thinking about That story could be about a guy that believes in something so much that he feels he's justified in doing it, fucks everybody over because he really thought it was the right thing to do. Then it's left feeling You won, but did you win? I know what that feels like. You know what I mean? I can relate to... I didn't make Facebook, but I know around that feeling. And then trying to make music not thinking just from a place of what comes out instinctually, that's wherever it's coming from.

[00:38:10.520] - Speaker 1
It's a long-wind way of winding up to say this. A lot of times what Atticus can do, particularly in the film side of it, is be the guy thinking and paying attention to what note you played and what phrase was better than what other phrase. It allows me the freedom of getting lost in the exploration as as a composer, as the subconscious turning stuff out. Because normally what would happen is in the world of film or even writing songs, a lot of times what I'll do is just jam with myself, often playing something and picking up another instrument without stopping on tape or a computer, thinking, I know this is going to go with the thing I just did, even though I'm not hearing what I just did. And we know each other enough to know now We don't really have to talk anymore. We can sense, or he can see me circling around an idea until I get around it, and then I'm moving on to something else. I know he knows we need to put these together or try it. It's nice after doing that for anywhere from 20 minutes to an hour and a half at one chunk, to walk out of the room and sit outside for a minute or go see my kids or change the scene, come back, It's starting to...

[00:39:32.540] - Speaker 1
Someone's already moved pieces around rather than, Okay, now let me sit back down.

[00:39:38.490] - Speaker 2
You're not starting from scratch.

[00:39:39.890] - Speaker 1
One could say it's the role of an editor, but it's more than that. It's a ranger and it's also... It's a collaborator in a way that goes beyond.

[00:39:48.350] - Speaker 2
Yeah. And he's picking. He's making the choices. He's curating your performance in a way.

[00:39:54.360] - Speaker 1
I'm trusting his choices because we know each other.

[00:39:58.210] - Speaker 2
How did you meet him?

[00:39:59.980] - Speaker 1
30 years ago-ish, John Malm signed 12 Rounds, which was his band with his wife to Nothing Records, at the end of that little tenure, late '90s. Right when I had gotten sober and I was... The world was raw and different, and a little uncomfortable initially. He and his wife came down to do something 12 rounds. And we just in the studio, I felt like someone I could communicate with in a way that... And also on a friendship level, we're not from the same lifestyles, but It just had a... Something clicked. Anyway, that led to... I was going to work on, try some Niners Nail stuff, and I had him come down as the guy in front of the computer and doing essentially what he does now with me. But we just have a mutual friendship and respect.

[00:41:12.310] - Speaker 2
What was the first album you worked together with him on?

[00:41:14.920] - Speaker 1
It would have been with teeth for Nine Inch Nails. I remember at one point, relatively early in our relationship, we were with Zack from Rage. He would come to work on his of stuff with us as the foils. That was a good bonding experience for us because it was a scenario of madness. In a fun to look back at way, but Frustrating in the moment?

[00:41:45.890] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[00:41:47.470] - Speaker 1
Well, it was educational in a lot of ways. I have a lot of respect for Zack, but I could see my traits in him, where I could see it in him And then I'd think, Christ, that's frustrating. But I would recognize after he left, no, I'm doing the same. I'm doing my own version of that same thing, but I didn't see it as clearly. Fear-based. I'm not saying anything dismissive of Zack, but at that time, I want to do something that doesn't sound like Raging this Machine. Okay, what about this? Can't do that because it's not what I do. Okay, how about this? Well, that's like Rage Against Machine. Okay. How about not that, then this? Yeah, but that's not like Rage Against... How about Go Surfing? You know what I mean? Let's not the end way. But I do a lot of the same shit when I'm left with my own devices.

[00:43:00.880] - Speaker 3
Leisure Craft, builders of handmade custom saunas, hot tubs, and cold plungees, constructed from the finest cedar, pine, and maple woods. Barrel saunas are the most efficient sauna shape, sustainable and eco-friendly, family-owned since 2004. Outdoor and indoor saunas, Hot tubs and cold plungees. Solid Canadian construction, built to survive outdoor weather, hot or cold. You'll feel safe with leisure Crafts' five-year warranty. An investment for generations to enjoy. Beautiful, timeless pieces for better health and ultimate relaxation. Explore the entire collection at leisurecraft. Com.

[00:44:13.270] - Speaker 2
So the first album is you say takes about a year, maybe a little more to make?

[00:44:19.900] - Speaker 1
I think it was being made while I'm figuring out how to engineer and put pieces together. So there's a naivety in it. The tape's almost worn out by the the song feels like it's finesse to the point, and endless amounts of tweaking and revising, not knowing any better. That gets to a point where I've got 10 songs I want to be on the album. We now have a record deal with TVT. Who do you want to produce it? In my mind, producer. Oh, that's going to be what you end up being. So cerebral, thoughtful task master in a good way. You know what I mean? Someone taking charge, a sounding board helping you articulate what you're trying to say, and maybe nudging you into a place way better than you ever could have gotten your own. That's what I'm thinking. That's what I'm looking for. I've seen names on albums, and those albums I light, and that name has been on a few of them. Was it them? You know what I mean? So who's the first-I don't know anybody. I don't meant anybody.

[00:45:37.220] - Speaker 2
Who's the first one?

[00:45:39.030] - Speaker 1
So I'd made a list of some people that were... Flood was one of those names. John Friar was the name on there that did a lot of 480 records. It had a spooky, reverbby sound. It wound up being that Flood only had time to do two songs, but he could do two tracks. So I was going to go up to, for whatever reason, the Cars Studio in Boston, and then right from there, fly to London to spend the next 20 days with John Freier in his studio and finish the album.

[00:46:15.910] - Speaker 2
When you say, Finish the album, was this using the tracks that you had already recorded or starting from scratch?

[00:46:21.850] - Speaker 1
I've got my tapes. We're going to do whatever we can and mix two days of song.

[00:46:28.610] - Speaker 2
What would you say was mainly done during that period of time? Was it more vocals?

[00:46:33.210] - Speaker 1
Well, here's what was interesting. We go to the car studio, Synchrosound with Flood. I meet him for the first time. I discovered him through Depech Mode, Nites of Rev, He is very cerebral, not as mentory, not as artistic, I'm just being honest, as you. An engineer that has learned about arrangement, is tasteful. We're talking a lot about synth programming. He's excited about how I got that sound and wants to... But at the same token, can sit down. We did head like a hole in terrible eye with him, and sits down and says, to start with, Bow down before... That's got to go right at the beginning, and that's the chorus. I'm like, That's not the chorus. That's a fuck. Try it. And immediately, it's like, of course, I've heard that 200,000 times. It never dawned on me that that's hooky. So right off the bat was like, I went into these sessions like, I'm here to learn. I'm open to any idea. But I know what I walk out of here at the end of the day is what might be what I'm winding up with. So I'm going to get firm if I need to.

[00:47:53.860] - Speaker 1
And with flood- You have to love it.

[00:47:55.950] - Speaker 2
This is your record.

[00:47:57.090] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I haven't gone this far for it to take I appreciate it, the finish long. You know? And this was... You literally have two days a track. That's all there is money for. It was 45 grand. That's your budget. So when we do this I have two songs, and I leave with them sounding a bit different than I'm used to hearing. Had a hole, particularly. But, okay, wow.

[00:48:27.830] - Speaker 2
Did you like it?

[00:48:28.690] - Speaker 1
I did like it. And it was different, but I knew it was right. The end of that story is we went back and mixed Head Like A Hole. It just got a different mix, but not a different arrangement. It was just the mix we did. We needed something. It was a little sterile. But then I went to London, and I didn't get that same feeling. I'm in London for the first time, I'm across the ocean for the first time. I'm by myself. I'm trying to pretend I'm not freaked out. And I show up and I immediately realize I don't have any chemistry with the person I'm working with. It's a much more care-free, now, let's just see what happens. I'm all smoking a joint, but put some sounds up and just put some noise in. Okay. It was about halfway through the second day when uncomfortable I have to say, listen, I have to love what leaves here. This might be it. You're going to do another record next week. I don't think it should have reverb on that thing. Well, I think it's the best thing in the song. Fuck you. If it's going to escalate to that level of just, Turn it down, or I'll turn it down myself.

[00:49:52.110] - Speaker 2
Where did you get the confidence to do it? It's great that you did, and thank God.

[00:49:55.860] - Speaker 1
Because I thought this is my only shot. I I believe in this album? Yes. I've instinctually guided the ship this far. Can it be better? Yes.

[00:50:06.300] - Speaker 2
Let's find out. Maybe.

[00:50:07.050] - Speaker 1
I can't make it better. Of course. But let's see. But when I knew this isn't better, and it also felt wrapped up in, I don't respect your process for me. I don't believe we're having a fundamental difference in artistic vision. I think you're being lazy. Yeah. And I think you don't give a fuck. And now I don't trust what you're saying. Yes. So that set the tone for that two weeks.

[00:50:41.850] - Speaker 2
And we didn't get-And you kept working together after that.

[00:50:43.880] - Speaker 1
I didn't have a choice. Because I just talked the record label into me using this producer that wasn't the guy that did Fine Young Cannibals or whoever's at the top of the charts that week. So I look like I don't know what's going to happen. We get it done, and the majority of the record is what we mixed there. When we get back, I turned the record in. Now, I'm shaken a little bit because of the process.

[00:51:11.800] - Speaker 2
How different would you say it was than what you showed up with?

[00:51:15.660] - Speaker 1
Marginal. Reverbby. The mixes are different because he could mix them. I had my own thing, but I wouldn't say it's...

[00:51:27.100] - Speaker 2
So his sounded more finished, but it didn't sound finished in the way that you would have liked it to be finished.

[00:51:33.240] - Speaker 1
I think in my mind, I imagined the transformation that took place with Head Like A Hole, where there was some structural change. It was an outside opinion that clearly was the right-Made it better. It wasn't... There's a little more sizzle on the hi-hat. Who gives a fuck? It was subtle. The mixing changes were basically... I had done the work, just put the faders up. He added the his vocals level sounded more pro than what I'd done. He knew how to use a compressor better than I did. I'm not being disparaging to his mixes. They were better than my mixes, but they didn't... We got into a tone where it became, Okay, what do you want to do?Yeah. I'm going to re-sing that voice, you mix, and don't put too much reverb on that, but see if you can get the drums to sound better. Okay, that's what it turned into, rather than, let's see what we can come up with. I didn't want it to be that No, I understand. The alternative was-I'm proud of you for making it happen. I didn't feel like I had a choice because I knew that could be it.

[00:52:41.280] - Speaker 1
If it is it, then I don't want to feel like, well, it could have been better, but I'll never see this guy again, which I haven't. Anyway, we get back. I get back. I I've probably spent $5,000 in long distance phone calls to my manager saying, crying. Man, this is not what I hoped it was going to be. I don't know. Anyway, filled with a little doubt now, back in the States, back home, turned the record in, don't hear anything for two weeks. Then, clear as day, I remember for some reason, I was back in my I grew up in, at my grandparents house, landline, and getting the call on a Friday night because I remember it was an odd time. I don't know why I was there, but I'm on the phone with Steve I've been. I just got to tell you, Trent, I think the record's an abortion. I'm not exaggerating. I think you fucked your career up before it even started. Okay. This could have been a hit record, but instead, you're trying to make it fucking weird, and you've submerged any chance of this getting played on the radio, and I really don't know what to even tell you.

[00:54:11.920] - Speaker 1
Okay. Well, I disagree with you. Well, that was the crux of the thing. Then some pretty sad conversations with my manager at the time. But it was, you know But fuck that, dude. We've assessed what happened in the mixes, and it isn't bad. It's better than it was as a demo. It's not some imagined thing that could have been. It's what it is, and it is fucking good. So we asked, I think, for another five grand to see if we could mix head-like a hole with a different, a little more exciting mix and something else we mixed, too. Not reinvented, but mixed.Yeah. They agreed to put the record out, and that was how the whole process started. Then jumping ahead, paraphrasing what happened after that. Our approach was, we just want to work and try to get the word out because we think it's a great record. Some decisions were made about how to present the band live and what recipe to put together that I think were wise decisions made in terms of how it felt when you saw it, how how we were going to play it, pull it off.

[00:55:32.110] - Speaker 2
Tell me about those. Tell me about those decisions.

[00:55:34.820] - Speaker 1
This record did not come about with people workshopping it and then recording it. It was the opposite of that. It was workshopped with the instrument being the studio, trying to figure out what is it I have to say, if anything, and how to emotionally convey it. Learning with the tools I had at my disposal, which wasn't a great live drummer. It was machines and that stuff. Then I've got a record where one song is eight guitars and a drum machine. The next song is no guitars and 15 keyboards, and the next song is whatever it is. Who do I put on stage? What does that look like from the from the audience? I just told this story the other day because I did a thing for retrospective on Lollapalooza. It reminded me of something that was, for me, a pretty pivotal thing, which was when I was working on a pre-8 machine. And I may have fucked up the time mind here, but before Nine Inch Nails is out playing live, and I'm trying to think about how to make it work in my mind. What I don't want to do is have someone faking, playing drums, standing up, hitting a pad.

[00:56:58.970] - Speaker 1
I don't want to do that. I want it to feel visceral, and I want it to feel like it can fuck up if it needs to. It can have some volatility to it. Jane's Addiction puts out, Nothing Shocking. I had not heard the triple X record before that. Chris Frendin brings that record home right after De La Soul. Let's check this out. I don't know. Retro-y, fucking weird, and cool. I'm not sure. It was in that phase of the first exposure, right? It sounds weird. It sounds cool, but is it cool? Now, all Also, as I recall, they're on Warner Brothers, and Warner Brothers is really pushing the shit out of this band. It was the opposite of what we had. They're going to be playing at the club, downtown Cleveland, Peabody he's down under, and it's subsidized by the record label. It's only five bucks to go see them. Motherfucker. I'm jealous of that. All right, let's go see him. It was that perfect time where we heard the record a handful of times, enough that we're familiar with it. Don't quite get it. Not in an avant-garde, I don't understand the way. Just I'm not sure.

[00:58:23.990] - Speaker 1
I don't know yet. It reminds me of something that you told me. I'll get to in a second. Standing in the middle of the floor, it's a club. They come out. It was so fucking good. I mean, it sounded great. They looked like freaks. Perry was hypnotic and in a weird trance. God damn. I look at Chris, and he's looking at me like, defeated in a good way. Just utterly-inspired.inspired in a... All right. I'm coming It's not it with a little competitive... Okay. That's where the bar is in terms of... We have to be able to make an audience do that. Not with the same rules and levers, but it has to feel as vibrant and as dangerous and as volatile and beautiful as that. It can't be a fucking tape playing back. It has to have that thing that makes it... And that became a thing we thought about quite a bit in terms of, when I say me, Chris and I, figuring out how to pull it off. The decision was made to have a drummer playing real drums and have a guitar player, but keep that aspect of the sound that we like, which is the mechanized sequence, rigidness, the purposely non-human bit of it.

[00:59:55.100] - Speaker 1
The easiest way to do that would just be put it on a track of tape so it's two things can like the tape or the tape machine. It's not a computer and a fucking bullshit, right? Drummer has a click. There's a playback track of sequence. Live band. Let's try it. And that recipe, I thought, worked really well.

[01:00:17.780] - Speaker 2
What was on the tracks versus what was played live? Was there any redundancy or no?

[01:00:24.340] - Speaker 1
Usually, it would be head like a whole 16th note sequence. What we didn't want to do is when you see the hip hop act at the awards show and there's a 60-piece fucking band with a horn section and live drums, and it sounds like shit because it's not the loop. It's not gritty, it feels pro, and it feels stupid. We didn't want that feeling. I remember seeing Howard Jones or something that did the same thing where it's like, Here's a track that sounds cool because it's three synths playing. But now you've got the world's greatest session drummer and background singers. It's just shitty. That's not what the song is. The choice of having machines on the record is because I like the way the machines sounded. Part of it was I didn't have people, but it became the machine.

[01:01:19.740] - Speaker 2
It gave the music a personality that was different than if it was people playing.

[01:01:25.350] - Speaker 1
If that has that rigid 16th note thing, I'd make sure what's around is in conflict with it or interacting with that. It's intentional.

[01:01:34.370] - Speaker 2
There also wasn't anyone else making alternative rock music in that way. If you think about it, it wasn't like the music that was being made, nobody was making it like you were. The people who were making music like you were, were Prince and the Depech Modes of the world, but they weren't competing with Jane's addiction. It was a different thing.

[01:02:02.000] - Speaker 1
From what... The stuff I was listening to, aside from those, the more heavier electronic stuff, where you could pick up the inspirations and the lifts They weren't writing songs. They were doing a thing. It wasn't about not being a song. All those Billy Joel albums and shit. They worked their way in a lot of the years. Anyway, the band turned out the way it did. What I found as we started playing live was, to my amazement, the songs could adapt into a They got more visceral. They got angrier, generally. Some of the arrangements on the album listening back after playing for a few months felt... I wish I would have had the band to play before we did the record because it would have sounded different.

[01:02:57.380] - Speaker 2
It was incredible live. I I saw you at that point in time, and it was incredible.

[01:03:04.330] - Speaker 1
It was fun. It felt like... It felt real. It felt like I could think through the recipe to set it up, but it had its own validity. It felt like the right thing at the right time.

[01:03:24.470] - Speaker 2
It also had a... In terms of stagecraft, there production as well that didn't feel like the Howard Jones example. In some ways, I remember the first time I saw you when you got big-time production, and I felt like, I missed It's the DIY version because the DIY version was so radical. Were you shooting like... I mean, it looked like fire extinguishers or like what? I don't know. It was whatever it It didn't look like normal special effects at a concert. It all just seemed completely out of control, broken stuff. It was wild and great to watch.

[01:04:13.000] - Speaker 1
It might be bad for you. Yeah.

[01:04:14.890] - Speaker 2
It felt like that. It was certainly bad for you on the stage.

[01:04:19.410] - Speaker 1
Yeah, exactly. It was fun. It didn't feel like... It took on a life of its own. It was a pleasant surprise. It was pleasant to see the songs adapt and get a little more muscular. Also, strange and exciting to see them transformed into things people are screaming back at me. It means something to them. That was one of the coolest things of being somewhere you've never been before. I never went anywhere, be in Tulsa. Some big dude, I don't know what it means to him, but it authentically touched a nerve there, just like music has done for me my whole life. Anyway, with what wound up being during the course of Pretty Hate Machine touring, almost two years of circling the country and the world a couple of times, it felt like we bludgeoned it into people. We found an audience by presenting it two people in a way that could make its own case, didn't rely on a marketing of the record label. And I'd hoped at the time, not to rub it in their face, but just like, Look, it did work. Can we move on? But it turned out to be the opposite of that.

[01:05:49.680] - Speaker 1
Oh, it did work. Now we can... Let's put a zero at the end of that next time. Let's start talking about who your new producer is. That's when you came into my life. Well, you were in my life, but that's when it was time to... I can't risk trying to keep this from fucking up again, going through that process. Anyway, it resolved itself. But I think the main lessons learned from that whole... My whole career was just standing up for what you have to say and expressing yourself in a way that feels authentic. I can say completely these days, if you like what we did, what I've done, it's what I wanted it to be. It was the best thing it could be in the various incarnations and whims I've been on. It never felt compromised by anyone's hand other than my own taste at the time. I worked with a couple of people who will remain nameless, and I'm sure you have, too. They'd say, I'm glad we did this record. I finally have something I feel proud of. Are you not proud of... You know what I mean? Not to sound like an asshole, but I've never put out something I didn't think was the best thing I could do.

[01:07:13.540] - Speaker 1
Why would I think it It's worth wasting anyone's time or investing anyone's time on?

[01:07:19.390] - Speaker 2
How did the second album differ from the first album experience? Based on the experience, based on the success, what changed?

[01:07:31.040] - Speaker 1
Yeah, lots changed. It toured forever on the first record. Towards the end of that tour, it was bittersweet because it felt like the battle that's raging on the record label front. It could be a terminal one. I made a stance that I'm not going to record another record for TVT. I'm just not going to do it. It wasn't out of greed. It felt they were activated now and excited about, now we're really going to get successful. So I couldn't have a partner that I felt was actively trying to do the opposite of what I'm trying to do. Integrity mattered a lot in that era, and where things showed up and how it was shoved down your throat mattered. I think it still does, but in a different way. I didn't want to risk the idea of Nine Inch Nails becoming something that was disingenuous because it was shoved out in the world in the wrong way, if that makes any sense. And recorded the second thing, the ERP, broken which was really just a react of, how can I make the angriest thing I could possibly make? How can I take the aggression that's missing from the first album that was harnessed in a live environment, turn it into something that's a statement that's concise and just a thing?

[01:09:05.260] - Speaker 1
Worked on that with Flood again, and we did it without TVT's knowledge. In the meantime, Jimmy Iveen manipulated his way into the situation. Now you're on Interscope. Who's Interscope? I was mad. I wanted to be with you. And I was a real asshole to Jimmy, initially, because I felt like All I want to do is just leave me alone so I can make music. You know what I mean?Of course.I don't want to be fucked with.I.

[01:09:37.190] - Speaker 2
Remember, it really did. I felt like every conversation we had back then, it was almost never about music. It was always just about this situation, this situation. It really was the bane of your existence.

[01:09:52.970] - Speaker 1
Yeah, it's strange now to even think about it because at the time, it was monopolizing. It felt very omnipresent, a specter over everything. At any minute, the plug is going to get pulled, and it was all a dream. But to Jimmy's credit, much to my surprise, he became a great partner. What do you want? What I'd like to do is deliver you an album with the artwork finalized, and you give me some money to make it. That's what I want. Okay, what else you want? And I want a label I could sign some other acts. Okay, what else? I can't think of anything else. For real? Okay. And meanwhile, I had come up with an elaborate plan for a record about a thing with an arc and a storyline to it. And I had a ridiculous flowchart of, here's thematically the things I'm going to discuss on the album, not songs, the album. Here's where it's going to go, the trajectory of the character. Here's musical things I want to touch on, not from stuff I've written.

[01:11:17.180] - Speaker 2
Would you call it a concept album? Yeah.

[01:11:20.330] - Speaker 1
I wasn't using that language myself. Just think about it. I thought, I'm going to make this thing, and it's going to tell this story loosely and it's going to touch on these themes, and it's going to have this, and it's going to have that, and here's musical things I want to be influenced by. Okay, now let me start writing all this stuff. I had a little money to set up to get an actual good quality samplers and some stuff that was inspiring. And talked to Flood about working together again and thought, let's set up in a house and do the whole romantic thing, probably Probably from you. Let's make it not feel like you're at the record plant, fucking around, but an environment. And then I'm sitting with that notebook and living in a house with gear in it, Chris running in the guest house. And ideas feel fertile, and there's lots of words coming, and there's lots of musical ideas coming, and it felt like it's hard to even keep up with what's happening. But what isn't coming is the added pressure. Pressure may not be the right word. The added desire to funnel all that into this equation I've written out of, Here's a cool song that feels exciting.

[01:12:47.780] - Speaker 1
Something needs to sit in that second slot where it's more up-tempo. But the words that are fitting with it aren't... It felt like it's trying to serve too many masters and starting to get It's starting to step on unbridled inspiration instinct because I'm trying to place it in this grid that seemed too complex. So a few months into it, I thought, All right, fuck that whole idea. I'm just going to make songs that sound good to me and exciting. And again, it never felt ominous or unfun. It felt like I got a new laboratory, and it's exciting. I have this new specter of there's an audience now. I know you know this feeling well with various artists, where first album, no audience, no expectation, other than your own, and maybe your labels. Now, more people than I ever thought know Nine Inch Nails and like Nine Inch Nails. Then there's times when it creeps in your mind, what do they like about it? It Am I going to serve another helping of that up? Or is this too... Am I getting away from whatever? Is AC/DC making a disco album because they think it's cool.

[01:14:10.670] - Speaker 1
You know what I mean? It wasn't overwhelming, as I remember at the time because I'd just done that broken ERP, which was the... It's not Pretty 8 machine, but it's just an ERP. There might still be hope.

[01:14:23.420] - Speaker 2
It was incredible. I remember. I loved it.

[01:14:27.240] - Speaker 1
It was a new thing that could haunt your late nights.

[01:14:31.600] - Speaker 2
Absolutely.

[01:14:33.120] - Speaker 1
Anyway, back to the story. After I'd abandoned the idea of a concept album and then just let things go for a while, a few months later, as I'm looking at what's landing, I realized it all fits into that grid. Amazing. Almost exactly.

[01:14:53.060] - Speaker 2
When you weren't trying to get it in the grid.

[01:14:54.930] - Speaker 1
I wasn't consciously even thinking about it. But I think of that master timeline song thing, two things moved, and everything sat right where it was supposed to. Then I realized, I need one song now. That works with these lyrics I had over there. That was a weird That's probably a great epiphany.

[01:15:17.510] - Speaker 2
It's like, Oh, it really works.

[01:15:21.330] - Speaker 1
Yeah, not forcing it.

[01:15:23.240] - Speaker 2
The thing you abandoned because it wasn't working was there all along.

[01:15:28.640] - Speaker 1
That's what I think about sometimes because I've gotten older, when I mentioned being able to be in subconscious mode, whatever that is. It feels like a real scene change to then say, okay, now, I'm not that guy right now. Now, I've got to be the guy that has to forensically range and make decisions. I'm leaning into it more, that role that I'm using.

[01:15:54.360] - Speaker 2
They are two different aspects of yourself. One is the three creative spirit who's working on instinct and subconscious energy. The other is the person who comes in after who's more like the professional. Like, okay, this part's really good. This is really good. This works with this. It's a whole different head. But we have them both. We can do both of those things.

[01:16:26.160] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I think what I used to flip between them, I don't remember it being quite so... I wasn't so conscious of the shift. Now it's more of a... I'd rather not shift into that. I'd rather stay as this guy for a while. But at that time on Downward Spiral, it all felt like it came together. I do remember turning that record into Jimmy with, You said I could do what I want. I'm sorry, man. It wasn't despite anybody. It was just like, This is what I feel like I need to do, and I don't think there's any singles here. But he's like, Well, you're wrong. But you've been wrong before. Yeah. That was a life-changing thing to have that record come out and, strangely, resonated as much as it did. I listen to it now, and that's a fucking weird sounding album.

[01:17:24.230] - Speaker 2
It still is. It's great. It's so great. It's so personal and so different than everything else. It's raw.

[01:17:35.030] - Speaker 1
I appreciate that.

[01:17:37.090] - Speaker 2
I think we skipped the part of the story where you came up with the name of the band.

[01:17:42.730] - Speaker 1
Yeah, there's nothing that spectacular I don't think about that, really. It's pretty unsexy, actually. It really is just grinding on putting things in a list that come from an unknown place and looking at them a couple of days later, and 90% of them are terrible. The ones that can last. That one, just the more I looked at it, the more it felt like it's nice to say it looks cool when you write it down, can abbreviate it into something that makes sense. It felt like it's ominous, in my opinion. I've heard every permutation of where it could have come from. And religious or sexual, whatever. But it just sounded cool. It was really the...

[01:18:36.570] - Speaker 2
I think I saw N-I-N T-shirts before I ever heard the music. I feel like they were just, for some reason, that T-shirt really caught people's imagination.

[01:18:50.770] - Speaker 1
Part of that also was a conscious... From growing up with kiss and bands with logos and stuff you could carve into desks and notebooks and iconography photography. It was always exciting to me. I thought the idea of much like Stageraft, I can appreciate the Pearl Jam, no bullshit, I get it. But I can also appreciate like, fuck.

[01:19:14.430] - Speaker 2
Being fluid.

[01:19:15.430] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Or an element of it's okay to dabble in these waters. That was always exciting to me to see if one could frame the music in a way that, frame a live performance experience in a way that embellishes.

[01:19:31.460] - Speaker 2
Social Network was the first scoring gig you did?

[01:19:34.270] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[01:19:34.880] - Speaker 2
And how did it come about?

[01:19:36.790] - Speaker 1
The first proper score, yeah. I'd gotten a dream-like call from David Lynch when he was doing Lost Highway. That resulted in a few days' sound design and him visiting the studio in New Orleans and being a huge David Lynch fan. The visit was everything you'd want in a David Lynch experience. And it wasn't real scoring. It was just a person he had worked with a long time sound designer had passed away, and he was looking for some help on some certain things. But it was interesting to see how he as a creative, how big a role sound plays and how he tells stories. It was interesting to see from a completely non-technical point of view. Scribble something on a piece of paper. I want to sound like that. But But I was friends with, acquaintances with David Fincher, and I met him through Mark Romanek, and a fan of his work. And then we started getting calls. David Fincher would like you to score his new movie. But it was coming right at a time where... I got sober in 2001 and prolific life change. Aside from something I needed to do to stay alive, countless life lessons, the biggest one being, I don't know everything.

[01:21:10.790] - Speaker 1
It's okay to ask for help and be humbled. I think the process of sobriety for me was a gun to your head of really assessing your choices in your life and what led you to decisions and your relationships and your shit, the way you lie to yourself. The uncomfortable process of going through that certainly has countless blessings that one can use past that and recognition of just being forced to work out some things that I think people that don't have to go through sobriety miss out on. I'm not saying I'm grateful I'm an addict or recovering. I'm grateful I'm in recovery. Given the choice to not be an addict, I'd prefer to not be an addict. But there's been a lot of things I've learned that have greatly helped me live a life that I feel good about myself today that came from the desperation of having that process. I mention that because being able to embark and engage in healthy relationship with somebody where you're completely honest and not bringing into it your own weirdness and bullshit.

[01:22:40.310] - Speaker 2
When did it get really bad? For me? How and when did it get really bad for you?

[01:22:45.630] - Speaker 1
I never set out to be an addict. I never romanticized it. I had my first beer when I was 13, and it wasn't that guy. I just felt like when I would be getting to know you, I'm in a place where I don't really know who I am, and now I'm being looked at by a bunch of people in a place that feels uncomfortable, and I'm already anxious, and I'm not sure because I don't have that armor on, because I don't have a Jean Simmons costume. I don't have a story like Perry Farrell. I was a male prostitute, whatever it might have been. That was a pretty cool story that I don't have I'm a fucking dude from Pennsylvania. I remember when I met Anthony, he seemed like he knew how to be a rock star or knew how to be himself. You know what I mean? I feel like I'm trying to figure out how toHow to be human.just be, yeah, not be on fire when I'm in the room.

[01:23:50.380] - Speaker 2
I felt much more aligned with you in the way I feel in the world. It's maybe why I resonate with the music so much.

[01:24:00.170] - Speaker 1
You see where this is leading. Having a beer, reduce that by 10%, I don't feel as... The intent was just to find relief from pain and anxiety.

[01:24:16.080] - Speaker 2
The pressure of, now you have an audience. Am I interesting enough?

[01:24:21.250] - Speaker 1
What if they find out I'm not interesting? What if they really see who I am? That could tie into that not good enough, My own mythologizing in my head, it's connected to where I came from, and it's because I was abandoned, whatever the fuck. But it came out in the form of, I like myself better with a drink. And then that creeps into where it creeps into. It took a few years. But I'll be totally honest with you. There's things I feel ashamed of. That time when David Lynch came, I wasn't at my best. I wasn't me. I was a little fucked up. I wasn't vomiting on people. But I'm ashamed of that. Someday, he I don't remember or care. But I'd like to say, Hey, I wasn't my best. A lot of the times with you, I feel ashamed that I was in the state I was in, that I wasn't the I wish you knew. I was the condition I was in. I've learned that addiction is a disease and all that stuff. I'm not challenging any of that. But I still feel ashamed of some of that shit. My time with Bowie, ultimate artistic hero.

[01:25:52.580] - Speaker 1
Calls me up to tour with him. Fuck, yes, I want to tour with you. Spending quite a bit of time together and him recognizing and big brothering me into, Get your shit together. I was there. You don't have to be there. I'm looking at him like, Fuck, man, he's got a beautiful wife. He's happy. He's telling me, this was the Outside album, '97 or something like that. Hey, I got back together with Eino. We recorded a weird album. Nobody's going to want to this. I'm going to go out with a band and only play this stuff. I'm not playing the hits. Nobody wants that, but I need to do it. I'm thinking, my whole adult life, I've looked at Bowie, Through the myth-making of how you hear about stuff as a guy fearlessly reinventing himself and unafraid of throwing away things that aren't broken to fearlessly try new shit. I'm watching him do it in front of me. We're bigger than Bowie when that tour came up. He asked if we'll play with him. I say the only way we'll play is if we open for him. How do we make that make sense to people that come see us at the amphitheater.

[01:27:17.630] - Speaker 1
Let's make a show that starts with... I said, I'll give up my ending if you give up your entrance, and let's make it one show that goes from us to you, and let's make it make sense, and we'll only use white light. When you guys come out, it'll feel... It was a cool show. Anyway, I digress. On that, though, he was a real inspiration. I'm seeing somebody that feels like they came out of something and they're on the other side and their life is good. He genuinely was in a place where he's happy. He feels like we're going to play these shows and people are not going to like what we're doing, but That's what this is. I need to do it. I need to get this out. I thought, Fuck. Would I have the balls to do that? I don't know. I've gone and played tours where I'm playing songs I'm tired of playing, but I know there's an expectation in that. Yeah. Is that compromising or is that-I actually want to share this with you, and this can either be in or out if you want.

[01:28:27.350] - Speaker 2
But I do want to share this because it's interesting. I saw you play at the Forum, and I want to say it was probably 14, 15 years ago, something like that. And the show opened. Now, keeping in mind, 30 years ago when I saw you, my favorite band, it was the original version of Nine Inch Nails. And this show that I saw 14 or so years ago opened with the original version of Nine Inch Nails. That's how the show started. And then it changed into different versions of modern production, all of which were incredible. There was a part where you were standing by yourself in front of a giant screen, There was a part where the instruments changed to electronic instruments. At the end of the show, I remember thinking, and again, biggest fan, my favorite stuff was the early stuff. I felt like the show would have been had that not been there, even though that was my favorite thing about the band.

[01:29:34.640] - Speaker 1
The older stuff.

[01:29:35.450] - Speaker 2
The old stuff. It's like it didn't make the show better. It felt more like it felt like an obligation. I've actually been wanting to tell you since that night, you have no obligation. You're free.

[01:29:53.090] - Speaker 1
No, I appreciate that. It's one of those things that if we're on the topic of how one presents the band, when there is a catalog and large amount of stuff, I will admit, I am torn sometimes about wanting to... I thought about this on the way here. Usually, when there's a scenario of a tour coming up, there's a discussion about what venues, what size, what thing. And in that discussion, money is part of that, finances and logistics. I think as a result of tuning into our audience, which I had done over the years, I'm consciously trying to do much less of I was fascinated with when the Internet changed interaction between fan and audience. They saw a lot more of you, but you could see a lot more of what their feedback, what they're interested in, what they're not interested in. Not from a, how can I tailor music to fit what you... Marvel Fandam, not that. But it was interesting at times to see if we play a show at the Forum. There's a lot of people pissed off because the experience And your experience isn't that great because it's the forum and it sounds like shit, and it's impersonal.

[01:31:20.200] - Speaker 1
And you've had that experience as I have. It's not as good as that club. If you play the club, the other side of it, you get in, I get in, they don't get in, and they're pissed off because they can't get in. And now it's scalpers, and there's a whole other world of fucking problems. If you play 30 shows at the club, then you're playing the show and you see the same people in the audience every night, and that starts to feel like, what are we doing right now? It's a boring conversation. It somehow zeros out at, I tend to feel like if we're going to play a show, I want that show to feel authentic and feel real, but I also want it to not feel like a self-indulgent. We know you want this, we're not going to give you that. We're only doing... Because I've been to many of those shows, too, where it feels like... I'm really not in the mood to hear another 20-minute solo off the new album that nobody really likes. Rolling Stones. I don't want to hear the whole new album. I'm sorry. You know what I mean?

[01:32:26.730] - Speaker 1
But I'm not saying it's...

[01:32:29.120] - Speaker 2
I get your point I think the other part of it that I would consider is, is there a way to never go through the motions of doing the song the way it was on the record? Because that's the way you did it and thinking more in terms of, Okay, these are the songs I want to play. These are the songs that I want to play. This is a group of songs that I think everyone wants to hear. I want to find a way to play these where it's interesting to me. How can I reinvent the song to be true to who I am today? What does that sound like? If you do that for a period of time, there'll be a time when maybe 10 years from now, you feel like, Whoa, it'd be really fun to do it the old way. It would be new to do it the old way at some point in time if you give yourself a break from doing it the old way, and you might really enjoy finding a new way in. It's a great experience. I mean, it happened unintentionally with her. I was going to say another Another version where that happened, which is interesting to me.

[01:33:33.170] - Speaker 2
I remember going to the Bowie show, and you had asked me to do a remix of one of the songs on Downward Spiral, which I did, and it was a very contentional I would say I-It was great, though. But it was definitely...

[01:33:50.600] - Speaker 1
Colored outside the lines.

[01:33:52.280] - Speaker 2
Yeah, outside the line, on purpose, because I felt like this is my favorite song on the album. Anything I do, it's going to ruin it. So I'm going to lean into that and just do something, make something else, because it's already... The thing that it is is the thing that it is. Anything I do is not going to be better. So it's okay. So I'll be really free. And then when I came to the Joey show, you played my version live, and it blew my mind. I was completely unprepared. It was the opposite of people love that song on the album. The audience wanted the real version, and you gave them the ruined version. It was fun. It really was. It really was. No, I couldn't believe it. It really made me happy.

[01:34:41.780] - Speaker 1
So I think you asked me, David Fincher, Social Network. Yeah. Anyway, I was getting married, and I just finished a long tour, and I felt like I just promised myself, I'm going to take some time and not fill the day with the next thing, not rush into the next thing, which I tend to do all the time. And then the phone's ringing with Fincher saying, Do you want to score this film? And he sent me the script, and I read it, and the script was great. And this new adult version of me said, I've got to live up to the promise I just made to myself. And I said to David, Look, it's It's not you. It's not the film. It's not the material. It's just to do this right, I have to immerse myself in it. I don't know how to do this. I don't feel like I'm in a place right now where I can give it my best. If I do, I'm not being honest with what I just said I would do for myself. Please respect it. It's not you. I totally get it. I totally get it. Then what happened?

[01:35:54.910] - Speaker 1
I get sleep for a couple of days, and I can't quit thinking about that, of course, because I I feel like I've let him down, and I feel like I've copped out. A few weeks went by, and then I called him up and said, Hey, one more time, I just want to reiterate. It wasn't you, and it wasn't the material. I just really didn't feel like I was able to pull this off. I said, If it ever comes up again, if there's the next film, please keep me in mind, because no, I'm still fucking waiting for you to do this film. When can youover. That's so funny. Yeah, and I went, and then we started.

[01:36:36.640] - Speaker 2
The rest is history. What was the experience like? I mean, first of all, just from a technical perspective, does he say, These are the scenes I want music. This is where the cue goes, or do you watch the movie and decide where the music goes?

[01:36:54.040] - Speaker 1
With Fincher, and I didn't realize this at the time until I was around other composers. A few months later in award season, craziness that never crossed my mind. It was even a thing. But with Fincher, it's really and still the greatest collaborator one could have in that area because he's carved out a space where he's fought to make sure that this camp of people that are making the film are not answering to producers or studios or any interests other than is, which is, let's make the very best thing we can. And the team he's assembled with his editors and sound guys, and they are great. And when you around them, you feel like, wow, I got to keep up. Not in an intimidating way. Everyone's ripping off each other, and you're watching this thing get better and better. And certainly, there was a feeling of, I don't want to be the one that fucks the movie up because I don't know what I'm doing. But what David will do, he started that process off saying, I'm thinking that it might feel a little electronic, maybe. And very, very few little breadcrumbs. And what had happened before, what led to him asking Atticus and I to work on this was, I made a record under Nine Inch Nails called Ghosts, which was just an experiment, which was I enjoy arranging music at times and trying to evoke emotional reactions, but the only time I get to do it is supporting a song and trying to arrange it in a way that sounds interesting.

[01:38:52.430] - Speaker 1
So I came up with an idea. I had Alan Mulder over and I said, Let's just do this. Every day, let's make a new piece of and whatever it is at the end of the day, we're done. This is an Eino-esque type of thing. Let's start with either a photo or a feeling or a phrase, and let's just make it that. Here's a picture of the end of a pier in a swamp in New Orleans, and it's dusk, and it feels Tom Waits-y, and just feels hot and humid and slightly sensual and almost menacing. What does that sound like? Not sound effects, but what would feel right? We need to score that idea. Say a movie like David Cronenberg's Dead Ringer's fills me with dread. I think it's a great film of just feeling like something bad is going to happen. Nothing good is going to come out of this. That feeling of dread. Make a song for that. It was just a fun thing that felt like no pressure. I felt the opposite of writing songs where it was just experimental and it was a chance to try different canvases and play around in different areas that I wouldn't probably get to in Nine Inch Nails' normal songwriting mode.

[01:40:14.710] - Speaker 1
And put that out as an instrumental double album. That caught Fincher's ear, and he had temped in some of that for Social Network. Because I said, Why are you bugging me? You're doing Because you have the language of being able to emotionally enhance the story I'm trying to tell. I'm not saying make it sound like that record, but I can tell from these experiments, that's the textures in the emotional resonance I'm looking for. Then I'm faced with that dilemma I mentioned earlier of how do you score a thing with talking. Once I realized we tried this strategy. Rather than call up Hans Zimmer and ask him, How do you start? We thought we had a little time, and we spent two weeks or so. Let's think about this film. We've seen a rough cut of half of it. We have the script. We've talked to Fincher about what story he's trying to tell, the feeling he's trying to convey. He's not trying to make it feel like a comfortable college shenanigan story. It's meant to feel more important than that. Stakes, emotional stakes and gravitas is meant to feel a bit more weighty. Then I just started daydreaming and improvising and wrote about 8 or nine, 10, maybe five-minute pieces of music that evolved.

[01:41:52.790] - Speaker 1
Here's a theme that goes from mild and benign to feeling like clouds or pretty in to something, whatever it might be. All of them had a feel like... You could put it on and listen to it and it would feel pleasant and it didn't feel like a loop. But it was essentially exploring different tonal variations of different musical things. I sent that to him and I said, Just see if this isn't for a scene, this isn't for this part, this isn't the whatever. But this feels like what I hear your movie as the world of it. It's also testing him to see, instrumentally, musically, tonally, are these things resonating? Some were more synthetic, some were more organic sounding. Just to see where... Because he's incredibly smart. He can... Pretty much any aspect of making a film, he can tell you more about the lens of the camera than the cinematographer, the fucking... With music, it's more of a shapes and It's not real specific in a good way. Anyway, we heard back almost immediately like, Listen, I'm going to try cutting some of this into a film, and in a couple of days, do you want to come see a quick cut of it.

[01:43:16.950] - Speaker 1
It's going to have your music in it, though. Sure. We walk into some theater somewhere, and I'm sitting right behind Brad Pitt watching a rough cut of this film with the music we just wrote, tried in different spots. It was an almost religious experience. I know it's obvious, but to be in the control seat for a minute and to hear something you did, see how much it affects the way if something plays and the way you feel watching it. I was hooked. Just with making me aware of the emotional power of music in the role of a film where you're experiencing a thing to know how much you can control one response to that thing and how varied it can be by what goes in there was just exciting to see. Absolutely. From that point on, then it became much more traditional, Now we know this thing works in that part of the film. Now let's get in and really start doing it once we had the breadcrumbs started to take root and seeds.

[01:44:25.960] - Speaker 2
The more often you do it, do you feel like you're always get better at doing it?

[01:44:32.280] - Speaker 1
Generally, yes. But what it's become, we did that film, the process of doing it, the pressure of being in a foreign situation with people who are great, and you like them as people, and you want to keep up, and then realizing you are keeping up, and you're inspiring them, and seeing it all come together on a film that is really good, and Also watching the film, Fincher has an uncanny way of, okay, he somehow managed to zone in on taking three frames out of that and tightening this one thing up. He's seen it how many hundreds of times and helped write it and filmed it and picked between 100 takes of that thing and composited this, but still remains objective enough to incrementally nudge it forward to where undenied it is getting better. As he's dealing with you on this one scene, he's also dealing with the other 100 things around it. It's pretty impressive. Anyway, we finish that film, and then, weirdly, it starts to get accolades, and then people are saying, you might get nominated for an Oscar. I was like, it's not possible. It's just like if you decide to run a race and you just won the...

[01:46:00.130] - Speaker 1
It can't be possible. It must be a flute. It felt good through that whole process. But I think in, as you endlessly had to promote the film and be in round tables with other composers that you know, but know of, but don't know, and you're hearing how fortunate the untypical the Fincher situation is. Really reframed experience we had. It was great. What it's become since then, as we've had time to think about, do we want to keep doing this? What are we getting? Are we trying to become a factory and just do as many films? What it comes down to is, I really enjoy, weirdly, working in service to something. Yeah.

[01:46:50.170] - Speaker 2
It's like also each one of them is a puzzle to solve.

[01:46:53.990] - Speaker 1
Exactly that.

[01:46:55.590] - Speaker 2
Yeah. It's like cracking a code. It feels good to crack the code, whatever it for whatever it is.

[01:47:02.300] - Speaker 1
What I think about now when it's choosing projects is it's all about the person you're going to be stuck in a room with trying to figure it out. If you know them, that's one thing. The last few we've done were all people we hadn't ever met before. They've largely been good experiences. It's interesting to psychologically understand, okay, the code is that director, right? Trying I have to tell a story. I am a tool that can help shape it in a tremendous way, but trying to get past, trying to understand what they're trying to say and then trying to do good work in outside the confines. I find it... I wouldn't want to only do that. If I do too much of it in a row, I find not really want to do something else.

[01:47:59.220] - Speaker 2
How different is the process from songwriting and how different is it when it's in service to something else and not you?

[01:48:10.160] - Speaker 1
To me, the hardest thing is the songwriting. Having something to say, having something to say with truth that has that thing, has that reason to exist rather than just a thing, just a exercise, having to think about the multiple layers of... For a Max Martin or a songwriter, I don't know how that works. I appreciate the craftsmanship of it. I've got five kids now. Five?

[01:48:51.150] - Speaker 2
Yeah.unbelievable..

[01:48:52.410] - Speaker 1
It's the best thing that's ever happened to me. I know it's a thing to say, but it's radically shaped every bit of who I am and why I do anything. The reason I mentioned that is for a while, I've kept them in a hermetically sealed away from pop music because I think it sucks, in general. I have thought that for whatever reason. I realized about a year ago, that's not fair. They're not away from it. I'm just not playing it at breakfast. In the car, I don't have on radio stations. I heard my daughter, who's six, sing in Dua Lippa the other day. She's so into it and it was so cool. This is her music. This is her thing. I've turned on and immersed myself in just what's happening out in culture now. There's no reason to bring all this up other than it really reminded me that the art of writing a well-crafted song when it... I teared up listening to Do a Dua Lepa track the other day because it was just a really well-done piece of music. It was clever, it felt good. If I was in the demographic-It is hard to do.

[01:50:19.140] - Speaker 1
It's a difficult thing to do. It's hard to do. This is how I got on this. I don't know how to do that because when I'm trying to think of what to say or how to say it, I'm saying it from the unvarnished me. That requires me thinking about who I am and where my position is now. All of that together becomes something that feels... Stakes are higher.

[01:50:45.480] - Speaker 2
It hasn't gotten easier over the course of your life?

[01:50:49.510] - Speaker 1
What's gotten easier in sobriety is not starting with, this has to be the best song in the world, or that ridiculous- It's unrealistic. Hey, this might suck, but I'm going to do it today. That I can have fun with now. But the feeling of... In the back of my mind, there is a... If this is ever meant to be out in the world, before I start writing the novel, I might want to think about what do I think it's about or what might happen in it rather than just what comes out. Sitting down musically arranging stuff can come from a, I know what's right. I don't have to assess my thoughts on how I feel about a thing that's who am I now? You know what I mean? My perspective in the world has changed. Who often, and I have to think of this when I'm writing, in Am I being honest with who I am now or am I in my- Playing a character. In an archetypal- Playing a character. Yeah, the character I was, I thought I was. Not in a crippling way, but just in a... It feels more difficult process. It requires more layers.

[01:52:01.790] - Speaker 2
Do you only write for a particular project? Let's say, I'm going to start a new album, so I'm going to start writing for that, or are you always writing?

[01:52:12.310] - Speaker 1
When film stuff kicked in, it coincided with being married and then starting a family. I realized I can never just sit around and be I feel like I've got stuff. I feel better if I've got some things. They don't have to be big things, but just something. If I had a day off with nothing to do and kids are at school or something, I'd probably find myself. Now I can learn how that drum machine works that I was interested in. That would be a fun thing to fill my brain with. But what it wouldn't be is what someone healthy would do to relax, whatever is. I'm not saying I wouldn't go for a walk, but I feel like I need something to feel like I'm getting stuff figured out. When film stuff came into the equation, it was a chance to do a lot of composition that felt interesting and informative and educational and rewarding feeling like you're doing what you're supposed to be doing level, emotionally, without the anxiety of in my own generic writing. And I felt nice not thinking about that. It's always a list of... As a parent, I find there's a never-ending well, if I choose to look in there, of what aren't I doing that I should be doing right now?

[01:53:48.230] - Speaker 1
How could I be more present? With five of them, there's always someone has an urgent need, or I can imagine there is one. Could be a better parent? The answer always is yes. Could I spend a little more time? I haven't been beating myself up, really, about, particularly with the pandemic kicked in. My thought great, this will be the time I can really write that opera. What I found instead was, I don't really want to do anything right now. I want to feel okay, and I want to make sure my family's okay. It's That's okay. Absolutely. That was a revelation, though. Anyway, I'm in a point right now where I'm working on some things that aren't music, and and aren't scoring films, but around storytelling, just to see if I can do it. One of the last times I saw you before this, I also remember feeling intense shame that I'll share with It was with Larry Jackson for an Apple thing that was going on.

[01:55:04.840] - Speaker 2
Yeah, I don't remember that.

[01:55:06.830] - Speaker 1
Did your old house burn? My old house burned. It was at that house. We stopped by for a minute. Well, I was working on an Apple.

[01:55:14.370] - Speaker 2
Are you not working at Apple anymore? No, no, no.

[01:55:19.350] - Speaker 1
Just briefly, several years ago, one of the things I was daydreaming about, interested in how people listen to music and consume music because I think it's important because I care about music. Spotify was just starting out. Streaming was coming. Torrenting and stealing music was declining. Record shops are dead. The industry feels dead. It's unexciting. As a consumer, it felt like if streaming becomes the new thing, wouldn't it be great if two things has happened. One, the experience as a consumer could be one that's like going to an independent record shop where, how many times have you done this? I walked in with no real agenda, and I left with my arms hurting because the bag's so heavy of shit. I didn't like, wow, I can't wait to listen to this stuff. I didn't feel that at Spotify's homepage. I felt like I was at the hall walking past the same shit that I would see the billboards of down Sunset Boulevard. When I stumbled into All Music Guide, and suddenly I didn't realize that guy produced this record, and I also played bass on that. Now I've 20 layers deep into an exciting tangent of connections I didn't even know, or I forgot about that.

[01:56:55.910] - Speaker 1
I want to hear that right now. Wouldn't that be cool if that could all happen in a place that's tailored to you that... That was thing number one. Thing number two, a pipe dream. Wouldn't it be nice if musicians could get paid for making music instead of it being a loss leader to get you to buy a fucking toaster at Best Buy or that line in the contract, future technologies that we'll make sure we'll figure out how to not pay you on, streaming, of which has become that, in my opinion. So came up with an idea that at the same time, Jimmy was trying to make the streaming service within the Beats ecosystem. It was a fun project to work on for a year or so, just to see if I could even pull it off, see what working that climate was like. Surprise, Apple wants to buy it, and now, can you work with Apple to help them launch their thing with those two points you just mentioned? I could try. I've never done that before. Let me see. Finding myself immersed in that corporate culture at the highest level, where it's me versus the engineering team about fighting for things that matter with the goal being an experience that feels, that elevates music into the experience I describe.

[01:58:24.910] - Speaker 2
What it deserves.

[01:58:26.040] - Speaker 1
What it deserves. It's not auto parts that need to be fulfilled. It's fucking art. Treat it as such. Give it a little reverence. Things like, why can I not see the inside record sleeve of any album in 2023? We've gone back in time. Could you not have someone scan that shit? Can you not treat it like it's a small aspect of one of the many things missing from the experience. Treat the shit with reverence. And I spent four years in various degrees of witnessing. It was educational. It was interesting. It wasn't music. It wasn't being an artist. I was voicing an opinion of artists in a corporate environment. I think I've made some inroads, but ultimately realized that if I wanted to make an impact, I had to move there and full-time become that thing. Nothing made me want make music more than even thinking that. I felt terrible. In the midst of that feeling, for some reason, we had to come out and talk to you about something about music. Larry was there and we were talking. The whole time, I just felt like, okay.

[01:59:42.840] - Speaker 2
I can't even remember it.

[01:59:44.690] - Speaker 1
Before I was drunk. Now I'm in a fucking corporation. I'm not an artist. That's how my brain works.

[01:59:56.700] - Speaker 2
I've never seen you in any light other than the most diligent and caring artist.

[02:00:04.380] - Speaker 1
I will try to listen to that with my whole heart.

[02:00:06.810] - Speaker 2
It's the truth. Anyway, I never question it.

[02:00:12.420] - Speaker 1
Oh, I appreciate that. I'm trying something that's... Weirdly enough, when I tapped out of Apple, six months later, there was something I missed about the foreignness of it, the challenge. It's another riddle to to figure out. Yeah, great. Anyway, I'm working on some things that's intentionally cryptic that might scratch that itch, but be closer to the artistic world than supply chains and who patiently awake.

[02:00:46.730] - Speaker 2
How do you say your relationship to music has changed since starting to make it to now?

[02:00:54.980] - Speaker 1
From as far back as I can remember, music was the thing I could relate to. As I could play it or perform it, it allowed me the vocabulary to understand how I feel about things and feel okay, either as just being a person to understand how I feel or as someone that can actually create something that has beauty or allows me to get it out. The role music played in my life is just to help me understand listening to music as a fan of music was has defined who I was in every respect. Being able to get into the game and make music and get it out to people, every dream I've ever had fulfilled beyond what I ever thought. Because it didn't start with how can I get famous or rich doing this? It was if I could just get on that stage and know what that feels like. Feel what it feels like, and it feels fucking great is what it feels like. Sometimes it feels terrible, and it's feels. I think as time has gone on, as some things become less, some aspects of that become less exciting, endlessly touring. I don't want to be away from my kids.

[02:02:17.260] - Speaker 1
Not that much. I don't want to miss their lives out to go do a thing that I am grateful to be able to do, and I'm appreciative that you're here to see it, but I've done it a lot. I think where it is for me personally right now in the context of Nine Inch Nails, in terms of an audience and the culture where it is and the importance of music or lack of importance of music in today's world, from my perspective, is a little defeating, I think. It feels to me in general, and I'm saying this as a 57-year-old man. Music It used to be the thing. That was what I was doing. When I had time, I was listening to music. I wasn't doing it in the background while I was doing five other things, and I wasn't treating it as a disposable commodity. It was a thing that you... I don't go into the cinema and do my taxes while a movie is playing. I'm there to watch a movie, and I miss the attention music got. I miss the critical attention it got. Not that I'm that interested in a critic's opinion, but to send something out in the world and feel like it touched places, might have got a negative or positive, but somebody heard it.

[02:03:45.970] - Speaker 1
It got validated in its own way, culturally. That feels askew. I can't think of any review I care about today that I even trust. I could write it before it comes out because it's already written. In fact, ChatGPT could probably do a better job, or is currently doing a better job. It might already be doing it. That makes for what I feel is a less fertile environment to put music out into. Completely understand. In the world of Nine Inch Nails.

[02:04:13.690] - Speaker 2
Yeah, completely interested.

[02:04:16.380] - Speaker 1
I think that's where some of the excitement of composition and film has allowed... It's thrust me into places I wouldn't be with my band. It's made me learn and be in awe of what music is and how powerful it is and how much there is to know about it and how much I don't know about it. I'm in awe of seeing these different ways it can affect you emotionally and techniques and sound and soundscapes and things I don't think I would have come across on the typical trajectory of being in a band. Reminders of what a fucking amazing form of art that I think naturally is just like everything in life, taking a minute to appreciate I'm alive. You know what I mean? Things could be much worse. I've got many, many things to be grateful for. Don't get hung up on this unimportant thing. I'm not sure if that connected necessarily. But with music, I've gone through phases of feeling stay off. I'm not thinking about it that much. It's just a thing. I understand.

[02:05:30.050] - Speaker 2
It's the way it seems like at the time that you entered music, you talked about the double album, seeing the Zappa double album and wanting to have that and wanting to understand what was going on there. We're looking forward to investing time in that experience. Now, just the nature, I think it's the nature of streaming, and there's good and bad to it. It's not all bad. There's good also. But it has changed that from the album that from your favorite group that you've been waiting for that you listen to for months or years becomes a thing that comes out and you listen to it for a week or two, and then the conveyor belt is always going by with something else, and it just moves on. So nothing seems to have the same gravitas of any... Whoever today's biggest act in the world is, I don't know who it is, but it doesn't seem to have... The fact that I don't know who it is tells you. It doesn't seem to be in the culture in the same way. But that same thing has happened with... I've mentioned this story before. I don't think I've mentioned to you, but when the Godfather came out, everyone you knew saw the Godfather, and it won the Academy Award for the Best Movie, and it was an event, or when Sergeant Pepper came out, everyone bought Sergeant Pepper, and everyone you knew heard Sergeant Pepper, and you'd hear it on the radio.

[02:06:59.870] - Speaker 2
Today, the Academy Awards, there are now 10 instead of five movies up for best picture. Chances are you and nobody you know has seen any of those 10 movies. None. Not one. So It's not just music. It's like it's just the way the culture has evolved where nothing seems to have that capture the imagination.

[02:07:25.500] - Speaker 1
I agree with you. I think some of that is the lack of monoculture your things, channels, MTV, a place where lots of people tuned into a thing. I think part of it has to do with to go really old school. When you bought an album, it existed somewhere. You see it, you encounter it, it's on your shelf. When everything is now in the cloud and it's all available, and you didn't invest in it, I don't even mean money, but even time, or it doesn't have a place in your house, it's just a thing. It becomes less tangible, and it becomes easier to forget. I miss the days. I find myself in a place now where I don't have a good place to discover new music. I used to know when the release date of all the things were. I used to steal stuff from the torrent site because I wanted to hear it. It wasn't to save money. It was just I just want to hear the thing. I'm excited about it.

[02:08:26.070] - Speaker 2
It was hard to find.

[02:08:27.500] - Speaker 1
Now, I often don't know it even came out. I don't like being in that place, but it feels like everything's sped up and it's just different. It's hard not to talk about this thing and start to realize, Oh, I'm becoming the guy that... I'm older. My perspective is also different.

[02:08:48.090] - Speaker 2
I think it also is, yes, part of it's growing up, but as much of it has to do with the way technology has changed, the way the culture works. It's just changed it. On The good side is if you do go to All Music Guide and you want to go down that rabbit hole, now you don't have to go hunting for all of those things. You can just press a button and hear every one of them. I like the idea that if something pops into my head that I can hear literally anything. I love that experience. I was going to tell you Shazam story. I love Shazam because it's great to be able to find out when something's playing. I almost never Shazam anything on television. I was watching a documentary a couple of years ago, and at the end of it, music came on. It was really loud, and it was really good. I never even pay attention to music on television. But it was good enough. It's like, I got to Shazam whatever this is after Shazam it. And it made sense. It's like, Oh, you made it. It turned out it was something you made.

[02:09:52.750] - Speaker 2
It was maybe Citizen 4. Could it have been that?

[02:09:57.560] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[02:09:58.050] - Speaker 2
It was good enough to make me want to Shazam it from a television show.

[02:10:05.420] - Speaker 1
That's great to hear.

[02:10:09.950] - Speaker 2
Well, thank you so much for rolling down here today.

[02:10:12.990] - Speaker 1
Oh, man. It's really my pleasure.
