[00:00:06.880] - Speaker 2
Tetragrammaton. Tell me about when it first occurred to you the possibility of living all over the world instead of where you were born.

[00:00:33.720] - Speaker 1
When I was about 12 years old and my father was researching living in four different countries, he said, Hey, the US is probably not going to be what it is for the rest of my life and certainly not for my kid's life. And so what if we made a move? Ultimately did not make a move. But he said, Listen, you should realize that the kids at school who are sitting around in Cleveland Oakland, Ohio, because they have to take care of their parents. We're going to take care of ourselves, and you should go to wherever you have the best potential, whether it's in the same city, the same state, the same country, even. You should go where you're treated best. And so that opened up a lot of opportunities.

[00:01:20.650] - Speaker 2
What do you think was going on in his life that sparked that? It's a radical idea, especially for people in the United States. The United States It seems to be a particular place where everything outside of the United States doesn't really exist. I grew up in New York, and in New York, really outside of New York doesn't exist. It's a strange myopic place. I didn't start traveling the world until recently. It's been eye-opening and beautiful and magical, and I learned so much and have enjoyed my life so much more since experiencing more of it.

[00:01:58.460] - Speaker 1
Well, it's interesting because a lot of people who live in New York, you see someone, they move from Cleveland, Ohio, or they move from Omaha, Nebraska, and suddenly they get to New York and they become part of the myopic thinking. I suppose the United States is geographically isolated, but more importantly, it's built a brand. I mean, you know about building brands. The United States is basically Coca-Cola. I mean, who is going to challenge Coca-Cola? People look at the rest of the world as being anything from RC Cola to like, dishwater. When you look at the statistics, which is what we were doing around the dining room table when I was a kid, my dad would say, Oh, my goodness, the US failed a sixth or whatever in the freest economies. We used to be number one, not very long ago, but now we're six, and now it's like 20, and they're being beaten by countries that, when I was 12 years old, were communists. We've just looked at these statistics. There's parts of the United States where the hospitals, the outcomes from medical care are as good as they are in Rwanda. But because it's Coca-Cola, no one challenges it.

[00:03:03.970] - Speaker 2
Tell me what those places are, just so I have an idea of where to avoid if I'm not feeling well.

[00:03:10.170] - Speaker 1
They did a big report on parts of Western Texas. Well, especially maternity, you are as likely to lose your child at childbirth as you were in parts of Africa. Wow.

[00:03:23.530] - Speaker 2
Where do you think you found the confidence to go? It's one thing for your dad to suggest it. It's another pick up and move. It's a big life decision.

[00:03:35.170] - Speaker 1
Well, what's interesting is my parents now have picked up and moved half-time, so they have a home in Mexico. I don't think it's a place that was ever on their radar before, especially my father. Oh, Mexico. He was very interested in Europe. He's always been someone who traveled. We'd go to Germany, we'd go to Portugal. But Mexico wasn't his thing. He bought into some of the stuff. He saw me doing it for all these years, and then he got interested and said, Okay, I'd like to be half the time in the US, but I'll do half the time on a beautiful lake in Mexico. For me, there was no other option. It was just, I want to go. I think that for a lot of people, there's some other push. For me as an entrepreneur at a very young age. That wasn't cool back in the early 2000s. Now, it's like everyone's on Instagram, they're an entrepreneur. Back then, your friends would drag you out to a bar and girls would be like, What are you doing? This is so stupid. You're wearing a tie. What's the... And You'd go on trips, and suddenly the girls in other countries would be like, Oh, that's pretty cool.

[00:04:34.900] - Speaker 1
You're just like, Oh, okay. I have to seek out these better social opportunities. You do it, and then you do it some more, and then you just get into it and you don't stop.

[00:04:44.790] - Speaker 2
Let's talk about your personal... Where was the first place that you moved to?

[00:04:49.330] - Speaker 1
We moved around a lot. Within Cleveland, Ohio, it was very weird. I think the last move within Cleveland, Ohio, as a kid was, Hey, the property taxes are one-third over this imaginary county line. And literally, the backyard was the other county, and they were so posh about it. Oh, we're in the county with much higher taxes. And my dad's like, Yeah, my bill is one-thirds. We moved around a lot. And so my parents said, All right, this is the last move. You don't have to move anymore. But when you're 18, we're going to Arizona. And I followed them to Arizona. I flunked out of Arizona State or dropped out or whatever, I don't remember. And I spent about 10 years there running a couple of different businesses, mainly in the broadcasting industry. It was a couple of side hustles. I sold everything when I decided to travel the world full-time. But in those last number of years, I was traveling substantially or even the majority of the time. But when I finally said, I'm selling the house, I'm selling the businesses, I'm moving everything out, I spent six months in Southeast Asia, not what most people do in Southeast Asia, but I was interviewing CEOs of banks and entrepreneurs and finding business opportunities in Cambodia.

[00:05:56.910] - Speaker 1
Then I went and did six months in Eastern Europe, mostly Northeastern Europe, the Baltics and what have you. After that, I said, Out of all those places, my favorite is Malaysia. I'm going to set up a base there, get an apartment, but I'll still keep traveling seven or eight months a year.

[00:06:12.930] - Speaker 2
Before we get into Malaysia, tell me about what you experienced in each of those places and what the plus and minuses of each of them were.

[00:06:21.020] - Speaker 1
I think there's places... I mean, Cambodia for me, I'm 38 years old now. Back then, I was maybe a lot younger. I think if you're 18 or 21, you could look at living in Cambodia. There's an incredible potential. I think even at that point, with some money to my name, that wasn't really a place that I would say, I want to live. It's not really any cheaper than living in Malaysia, and the standard is much lower. But you're going to make a lot more money if you start a business on the ground there. So I was looking for investments. Some of those places were just never... Laos, for example. Is this country ever going to be opened up? It's one of the last Communist countries in the world. And so I was interested to get a jump on that not to live there. I think Vietnam is very affordable. The problem is it's hard to communicate with people. It's not as Western if you want that. I think eventually, most people, they return home because it's too exotic for them.

[00:07:13.880] - Speaker 2
Let's talk about that exotic idea because right now you're describing most of the things you're describing have more to do with financial reasons to move. But I know that's not the only or maybe even main reason to move.

[00:07:26.280] - Speaker 1
I think even my parents said back in the '90s, this could be an adventure. And so I think it's fun. I think some people look at it as, Hey, I'll go and live in Malaysia. I'll get a job. I'll do whatever in one of those places for four or five years. And then I'm coming back to Denmark, to the UK, whatever. I, at this point today, as I talk to you, I have no home country to go to. I gave up US citizenship. I don't think they want me to come back, and certainly not to live there. So there's no giving up for me. But no, I think that when I look at the clients that our company has served, I see a disproportionate number, no judgment, of people who like, I don't want to call my mother, even if it means I can get a second citizenship because she has the documents to help me do that. I don't want to do that. I'd rather pay $100,000 and get Caribbean citizenship on some island that accepts donations rather than reconnect with my family tree, I don't want to talk to my mom. So I think that there's some level of hurt in some of the people that go about doing this.

[00:08:25.750] - Speaker 1
And for me, I was a guy who was I was bullied in school. I was bullied by some people in my own family growing up and then got out into the real world. The only choice I had was being an entrepreneur. I didn't think what corporation would want to hire me, and I certainly wouldn't want to take orders. So I started a business at 19 And then the fact that that was weird in the US, but not weird in Norway or Asia, that was cool there. I mean, that was all the social part that helped me.

[00:08:56.270] - Speaker 2
So the first place that you moved to was I guess you'd call Malaysia Southeast Asia.

[00:09:02.530] - Speaker 1
That was the first place I said, I'm going to set up a base. Because before that, I was just traveling with a suitcase every month. It's a new place. You're the weirdo because everyone in Laos is like a backpacker, and they're like, You have a suitcase? That's weird.

[00:09:17.710] - Speaker 2
Describe the lifestyle in Malaysia versus your lifestyle in Ohio.

[00:09:24.910] - Speaker 1
I'd lived in Arizona as an adult, so I'll compare it to Arizona. I called Malaysia the United States of Asia in the good ways. So the government does not bother you. The police are cool if you ever see them. Like, Malaysia are just really cool, laidback people. And yet the country has become very successful. It's on par with some of the lesser EU countries, really. Anything novel is fun, but I found it to be the United States of Asia, but only in the good way. People speak English, it's multicultural. That's interesting. There's lots of different dining options. It feels, in a sense, more than a place like Vietnam, certainly than in Cambodia. It's 85% of Singapore, in my opinion, and yet you can buy real estate very affordably there, unlike Singapore. That's how I saw it.

[00:10:13.050] - Speaker 2
Have you lived in a place that English is not spoken?

[00:10:17.860] - Speaker 1
I've been very nomadic in my living. It's always an interesting question, what counts as living? If you spend a month somewhere, two months somewhere, if you get an apartment, what is it that's living? I've said, if you wanted to apply more It's a conservative standard, I've lived in maybe 12 countries. Yeah, I mean, Colombia, certainly. I mean, that's when people don't really speak English because the Spanish-speaking world is so big, they don't have to adapt. I've been to places like... I've lived in Serbia, I have a house in Serbia. They speak English impeccably in Belgrade. I think probably Latin America has been the biggest one where I've struggled. I haven't spent as much time in Russia or Central Asia, where that's very much the same thing, but it's the Russian ecosystem. I I think those would probably be two of the hardest ones in the world. Obviously, again, I spent a month in Cambodia, and that was the first time I went was 11 years ago at this point. I guess in the tourist industry, they speak English, but a lot of other places, you're not. I never found that to be a huge challenge.

[00:11:16.750] - Speaker 1
I found it to, at a certain point, be a frustration, which is why I am spending more time in Ireland now because it's nice to feel heard.

[00:11:23.160] - Speaker 2
Do you feel like an outsider in the places that you go to?

[00:11:27.910] - Speaker 1
I would probably feel like an outside of regardless. I think one reason people like Asia is it's very accepting. In a sense, you realize we don't look Asian. They're never going to... Every time you're telling your maid or you're giving away a cat that you fostered, they're like, Oh, are you going back to your country? It's like, I'm coming back in three months. But they know like, Hey, this is not your country. Even I have a friend who got Asian citizenship. Nobody believes him. He's still not one of them, even though he's a citizen. It's a very different thing than if they became American citizens, you'd be like, of course, they're American. It doesn't work the same way. But yet, especially in Malaysia, the Philippines, they are extremely accepting. I think in Eastern Europe, you have more nationalism. You're not going to meet those people when you're hanging out in the places that you would hang out. But there's more of a gruffness in that part of the world. I think that you would feel accepted if you spoke Spanish fluently anywhere in the Latin American world because they countries of immigrants. I think that there's a spectrum.

[00:12:33.260] - Speaker 1
For me, as someone who has spoken a couple of different languages, but not to the point where we're going to discuss Socratic principles fluently, I found Asia to be the most warm and accepting. Of course, I think a country like an Ireland or something like that is very welcoming as well.

[00:12:51.710] - Speaker 2
Let's go continent by continent and talk about all the different options, positives and negatives. We're going to do Europe first.

[00:13:00.330] - Speaker 1
Yeah, let's do Europe. I think that, again, there's a psychology to this that I haven't thought about myself because I just really wanted to do this. Most people are probably not going to jump into going to Asia. People want some familiarity. I think Europe makes sense.

[00:13:14.550] - Speaker 2
But Living in Malaysia, you say, is not unfamiliar for you. And do you think me, I've never been to Malaysia. If I went to Malaysia, would I feel out of place? Would I feel uncomfortable? Would I feel like I don't belong? Would I feel like I can't find any of the things, any of the comforts that I'm used to?

[00:13:34.090] - Speaker 1
Okay, let's talk about Malaysia. I will say the one difference spending a little bit of time in Dublin is Amazon is the best. Other countries have their own e-commerce sites. Amazon is the most intuitive. I got used to in these other countries, Hey, you go to the store, you buy things. It's a little bit of fun. It's not quite as efficient, but it's charming. They're not using the smart speakers everywhere. It's just a little bit of an older-school life. Certainly, the convenience now coming back to somewhere with Amazon is better. But everything else, if you don't come with a bias, yes, I think you will feel accepted in Malaysia, probably more than you will in some parts of Europe. But I think that from what I've studied, reaching tens of millions of people, helping thousands of people doing this, there's a discomfort of going too far too soon to where I think people say, Okay, I live in California, so Mexico Okay, yes, they speak a different language, but okay, everyone's in Mexico City now, they're speaking English, or everyone's in Baja or whatever. I can get by in English. I'll learn the language eventually.

[00:14:39.560] - Speaker 1
The food is similar. The convenience stores look the same. Or I'm going to go to Ireland because I'm living in Boston or something, and that seems familiar. I feel that people stick with it longer when they start with familiarity, even though I did the opposite.

[00:14:56.920] - Speaker 2
You think that if you move and have a good experience experience in a familiar new place, you'll be more likely to then branch out from there and see what's possible.

[00:15:07.450] - Speaker 1
Possibly, yeah. It's been interesting these last couple of years because we had, let's say, the COVID stuff, and people were saying, I want to be a little more open. Obviously, the countries that were familiar were not those. It was a very interesting dynamic watching people like, Oh, you want total freedom and low taxes? Nicaragua is the best place. That's what checks all the boxes. Obviously, that's a different experience.

[00:15:32.080] - Speaker 2
Where did many people go during COVID? Was Nicaragua the only option?

[00:15:37.290] - Speaker 1
No. I think that particular guy was living in the Caymans, and he just wanted something near Why? A lot of people went to Serbie and Montenegro, and they weren't perfect. But we had a lot of, especially, Australians going there. Serbie and Montenegro now being two countries, of course. But yeah, I think that those are places where people just want to be left alone a bit more. Obviously, coming out of a Communist backdrop, the culture is going to be different. Again, people are going to be very direct, which is nice in some ways and not nice in others. If you're coming from Australia or the US, that may be too much directness for you. But that's one place a lot of people went, Nicaragua, Colombia to some extent.

[00:16:21.270] - Speaker 2
How do you feel about Costa Rica?

[00:16:23.930] - Speaker 1
Costa Rica is also... I think I'm probably a little bit too much of a contrarian. I have to turn that off in the business side of me when I just want to help somebody. I was never a big fan of Costa Rica. I do feel some of those countries, Nicaragua may be the exception, but the countries that play a role with the US and Central America are a little bit... I It does feel police stady. When I flew out of Costa Rica last, it's like, Oh, my goodness. El Salvador, I guess now, he's pushing back as well. El Salvador and Nicaragua may be the ones that are a little bit different. The world is changing, by the way, Rick. Following the US is That's not the only way to survive anymore. But I feel like Costa Rica is a name brand. It's probably just not my vibe. I'm more of an urban guy. I'm not doing meditation at 6:00 AM. But I feel for some people at work, It works, and yet I just don't entirely get it, I guess. I would just say this, if it works for you, fantastic. What I tell people, though, is when I'm in Southeast Asia, again, I'm a little bit contrarian being in Kuala Lumpur.

[00:17:28.880] - Speaker 1
Most of the guys will to Bangkok, for example, or if they want the islands, they'll go to Phuket. I think some of those guys are looking for dating, which is probably better in Thailand. I never chose a place based on dating alone. But if you're following someone to Bangkok, just because that's what someone else is doing or Bangkok, or Barcelona, or Guanacaste. Don't do that. You have to make up your own mind. I think most people are just like, Well, that's where everyone's going. That's where I'll go. Well, maybe you shouldn't. Yeah.

[00:17:55.840] - Speaker 2
I just met someone who lived in New York their whole life and for the last 10 years has been living in Thailand and absolutely loves it. Can't imagine ever coming back. And he mentioned Phuket.

[00:18:09.790] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I have a lot of friends who are in Thailand. I think Phuket is interesting. What I like about Malaysia is you can own land. Now, Thailand is slowly opening up little caveats for how you can have land. But what's nice about Malaysia, it's one of four countries in Asia where you can own land. And it's the most tax friendly and it's the most immigration friendly. I mean, Japan, you can own land, but there's really no way to immigrate to Japan, really. It's very difficult, and the taxes are a mess, and the weather's not as good. For that reason, I like Malaysia. Some people go to Penang. Lankaui is a little bit more difficult. There's more of the ethnic lands that are set aside, probably not a place to live. I think if you want the services, if you like the vibes, Thailand's also tax and immigration friendly, but you just have to deal with if you're going to own a property, how do you deal with the land? I guess if you're investing seven figures now, they're opening up some ways to own the land. If I were a beach person, I would probably favor those beaches for amenities and services above a lot else in Southeast Asia.

[00:19:12.260] - Speaker 2
Now that I've opened up my experience of different parts of the world. The first thing that happened was we spent our summer in Italy, and Italy is great for more than just three months. I didn't know because I had no reason to know that you can't stay for more than three months as an American citizen without it being a complicated process. That started this idea of, I really want to be able to go wherever I want to go. I want to be able to be free to travel and experience these different places and not feel like I'm under any time pressure to be in any particular place. That led me to your work. It's a great feeling.

[00:19:49.660] - Speaker 1
Yeah, we got to get your residence permit or any European citizenship. I mean, a lot of people listening may have an ancestor from somewhere in Europe, whether it's Italy or not, that would allow them to get a passport We have a guy who works for us who's Polish, a Polish-American. He got the Polish passport. He could live in Italy because it's all part of the EU. But yeah, what you're describing is I created the trifecta method where I said it's hard for... Now, I'm doing less of this these days because I think there's an evolution from perpetual traveler to base plus travel to a few bases to just pick one main base. But I created the trifecta method myself because I couldn't decide between Europe and Asia and Latin America. I would go to each one and be like, Oh, this is so great. The food, you get there. But then after a while, if I go to Bogotá, if I spend time in Colombia, it's like, All right, I am not fluent enough to feel like I fit in. So I have my friends, I improve my Spanish, I do my stuff. But after a while, it's like, Let me go somewhere else.

[00:20:55.070] - Speaker 1
I also then realized for someone in your position, Hey, I'd like to live in Italy, but not long enough to where I've got to pay taxes or have the tax complexity. And so I said, okay, well, if you carve it up into three or four months each, we can do that in tax-wise. And then to your point, the immigration, which I think is an easily solved problem. But the The objective method was there's just so much out there to see why would you settle. And I think that for me, the natural progression, as opposed to many people is, doing that for long enough makes you realize what you most value to then go out and isolate that rather than moving to one place and then longing for the other stuff that you've missed.

[00:21:35.910] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the people who come to you.

[00:21:39.990] - Speaker 1
Being on YouTube, being rather public, we get all comers. We put together an annual event so that people could just come and hang out, and that's a great opportunity to meet like-minded people, because most people aren't a fit for our client services. The people that we help as clients are high net-worth individuals to ultra high networth individuals, high earners in businesses, and they want complexity because they realize, look at your situation. If you're American and you're spending a decent amount of time in Europe, and then you're also going to other places, you've got a potentially rather complicated tax profile. I'm a guy who I don't want to be on the wrong side of anybody. I don't want to be getting a letter in the mail. I don't want to provoke the IRR of the IRS. I just want to make sure I'm doing it right. On top of that, maybe you want different permits to facilitate your lifestyle. I have numerous passports and residence permits I don't use, but they're good backups. I think with the craziness in the world, that's how... The clients that we work with are saying, I want the full suite of services to make sure that I can live the life I want now If it hits the fan, I'm covered with other places I can go, other asset protection stuff.

[00:22:51.160] - Speaker 1
I want it done all legally, and I don't want to have to call 12 different people to do that. It's a service that's hard to break down. It's like you watch a Rolls-Royce being made by hand. Everything's done by hand. How do you make a cheaper version of that? But that's who's coming, is they have the complexity that I have or that you probably have.

[00:23:12.540] - Speaker 2
What would you say are the benefits of being a global citizen?

[00:23:16.060] - Speaker 1
Well, I think there's a lot of opportunities out there. I think, as you mentioned, a lot of Americans, you look at the sleeping giants that are coming up to be the world's largest economies in the next 20 years. Most Americans have never heard of them. If you just get out, you're going to find this stuff. I mean, everyone says, Oh, I'd be interested in going to Singapore or investing in Singapore. You're too late. The time to be there was in... I have a picture of the early '70s when kids are selling gum in the streets in Singapore. One out of five people there now is a millionaire. That's the highest in the world. You're too late. I think one of the benefits is an adventure. But along that, where should I put my money? What's happening in the world? We interviewed Jim Rogers. He said, If you're a smart guy, in 1800, you moved to London, 1900, New York, in 2000, you'd move to Asia because you're going to see how the world is unfolding. Whether you're in business, whether you're an investor, that's a big thing. And I also just happen to think that the trend in the West Eastern world.

[00:24:16.220] - Speaker 1
I would exempt a few countries, but the big countries in the West, it is going the wrong direction. People feel less free. People are at each other's throats. Let's not make this political, but people are talking about stuff that frustrates them in the US. And I'm like, I don't even hear about that stuff where I live. I haven't heard a peep. It's hard for me to get angry with you because I'm not dealing with that stuff. They're like, How can you not be angry about this? It's like, Nobody's talking about that where I live. I really feel like, I talk to my friends in the United States, I feel it's like everyone is outraged now. It's like, don't you think you'd be happy? They can't even imagine not being outraged, many of them. Their idea is, how can I be outraged and win? How about you just have a happy life? I think that, I mean, Malaysia, for example, that's just a perfect example, the Malays are just focused on waking up today and having a happy life. That's it.

[00:25:11.550] - Speaker 2
That's it. Amazing. It's an interesting thing that we get to experience when traveling in the world. Growing up in the United States, watching movies and television, we get programmed to think of people in other places as either being bad actors or enemies. I remember there was an episode of some... One of the comedies, an old episode from the 1940s, and they had Japanese people not as human beings. They had more like animal-like features, and that was propaganda in that time. Now, there are places in the world where they're not teaching Tolstoy or Dostoevsky because the Russians are viewed as monsters. There's so many stereotypes that get projected to us. One of the great things about traveling is you see none of that's true. We're all just people, and everybody's cool. It's really nice to have that experience of meeting beautiful Japanese people and beautiful Russian people and great Chinese people and lovely South American people and friendly Arabic people. It's a great experience. I think that's one of the benefits is it's harder to have an enemy when you can meet the people and see they're not the monsters that we're being told.

[00:26:36.980] - Speaker 1
I think also where people excuse what happens in their own country. You mentioned the Russians. There's plenty of Russians who don't like what's happening right now, geopolitically, and somehow they're just cut out of the whole system now. What if that happened to Americans? What if the world... And by the way, I think that you are seeing 29% of the world is sanctioned by the US US financial system now, up from 8% at the turn of the century. 8%, you can probably explain. There's some bad actors. 29% of the world is under US sanctions. Do you think none of those people, as their economies grow, Nigeria, Indonesia, Brazil, China, India. You think none of those guys are going to say, Hey, you know what? We're tired of being under your boot. We're going to do something on our own. What if Americans are shut out a certain opportunities some days? And what if the West continues to go down a path where you have fewer freedoms, you have less freedom of speech, you're not allowed to speak out? We don't have to get into all the things they're talking about, but I just think that I'd like to have a connection to a different part of the world.

[00:27:44.670] - Speaker 1
You're saying, yes, it's not that scary. But I'll say this, if you get robbed in the United States, you're going to blame the criminal, not the United States. But if you were to go to Colombia, would you blame yourself that, oh, maybe you didn't go the right neighborhood. Because my neighborhood, there's nothing happening in my neighborhood in Colombia. It's a pretty safe neighborhood. It's a pretty just normal, successful Colombian people. Why is it you'd go to Colombia and blame Colombia? But in the United States, you blame the Crocs? It's this thing where, again, it's the Coca-Cola. We are on the side of this brand, so therefore, it's not the brand that's the problem. It's so disingenuous.

[00:28:28.750] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the differences between Mexico and the United States. The projection is Mexico is this dangerous place, and be wary of going. What's your opinion?

[00:28:40.260] - Speaker 1
Well, again, I had to turn off the alerts, and it's sad, but I mean, how often was there some shooting in the US? Again, in the US, you're like, Well, nobody shot me. Okay, I mean, how long have we all spent in Mexico? I mean, Mexico City, I was telling people when Trump was running in 2015, Don't move to Canada if Trump wins. Move to Mexico. It's much better. It's cheaper. The people are just as nice. The food, everything's better. You can actually move there to your point. People just think like, Oh, I'm an American. I can just move wherever I want. No, you can visit most places, but to move there, no. I think Mexico, obviously, if you look at the statistics, and that's what I'm about, yes, things like murder rates and stuff are higher, but let's isolate that. Where can you go to avoid that? If you live in Naperville, Illinois, it's an example I use a lot, you're not really concerned about what happens in Chicago. That's why you moved out of Chicago. You figured out where to go. If you live in Mexico City and you live in Lomas, for example, you're probably going to be fine.

[00:29:41.960] - Speaker 1
There's certain areas that you don't want to avoid. Then again, I say, Okay, well, if the goal was to avoid violent crime, you have to move out of the US because it's in the top one-third of violent countries. Most other countries, including the UAE and all those Gulf countries that Americans pooh-pooh, they have 90% less of violent crime. It's almost not existent in those places. I think Mexico is a great soft landing. Again, the food is similar, the culture is similar. I think people there hug their families more. The President of Mexico was picking on Joe Biden recently. We're all about family here. Your country is breaking down. Yeah, we're the ones moving the drugs. You guys are the ones taking them. I think there's more of a family environment in Latin America. And yet I think that... I remember, who was it? I was talking to a Mexican guy. This is many years ago. He's like, Yeah, people, Americans think that we're the machisimo guys, and it's the patriarchy. He's like, That's what we think about you guys. I just think perspective is valid. Perspective that seven European countries have the US on a travel advisory list because of all the shootings and all the violence.

[00:30:52.270] - Speaker 1
Again, is it only what your country does that counts, or is it when Germany's like, Hey, you might not want to go to the US because there's a a lot of stuff happening.

[00:31:14.210] - Speaker 2
Oh, no, no, no, no, benefits of moving from the US to Europe and the difference between the countries?

[00:31:21.360] - Speaker 1
I'm increasingly seeing a very strong divide between the northern European countries and the Southern ones. I mean, you're in Italy, so it's a bit more laid back. Stuff doesn't always work. I don't think I've been to Italy a single time in my life where somebody's not on strike for something. If you're going to live there, you're going to hire a driver, you're going to do... Okay, you can manage that. But it's just a different environment. I think that some of Europe is probably too laid back for some Americans, although there's some Americans who are looking for that. I look at Europe as, I mean, it really is something for everyone. To me, Ireland is nice people, don't need to speak a new language. It is international, but there's just It's a charm to it. Italy is laid back. The food, Spain has its own vibe. I think that it's hard to put Europe into one bucket. We have a guy who we're helping move him to Germany. We don't do a lot of that because Germany has high taxes. Most of our business is around, in addition to everything else, Can I lower my tax bill?

[00:32:22.400] - Speaker 1
Italy, Ireland, Portugal, Greece, Switzerland, allow me to do that. But big difference between Switzerland, which is It's probably too much bureaucracy and too much hassle to move into for most people. Things are going to work there. They're not tolerating things not working. Where you take the train I did last year, you take the train from Zurich to Lake Como, it's night and day. I think people have the opportunity to pick what they want from Europe. But I think that, again, it's a brand that Americans are familiar with. When I said people were moving to Serbia and to Montenegro, that's because they'd seen me talking. Everyone who had been watching me for years suddenly had a lead, and they'd heard me talking about those places. And so they were preconditioned to it. But most people, the brand Serbia is, it's where the villains from the spy show are from. That's why I think Portugal seems familiar. And I just think that most Westerners have not moved overseas, especially Americans. It's a new concept. Why do I need to do this? Let me follow where everyone else is going. That's why Portugal has become successful recently. But I'm not sure that's the best place to go.

[00:33:30.580] - Speaker 2
I've been to Montenegro, and it's not so different from Italy. First of all, it's very close. It's maybe less than an hour away. The architecture feels very similar. The food feels very similar. It feels just on the other side of a small body of water.

[00:33:45.320] - Speaker 1
They have one of the best, I think, the best, statistically, yacht club in all of Europe. What's nice is it's open to everybody. You've got a lot of people from Russia now, you got a lot of people from Ukraine now because it's open to everyone, and so it's a bit more neutral. Yeah, I like it. They use the Euro, so it's not particularly cheap. A place like Serbia is much more affordable without the Coast. The Balkans is a very traditionalist region, though. I know some people are looking for that. When I flew from Dublin to Belgrade about a month ago, you When you look at the plane, it feels different. I mean, women want to be women in a very old-school way in those parts. It's a very interesting dynamic. I guess Italy is certainly more conservative than people would think. People, Western Europe. But it's more conservative than much of Western Europe. But the Balkans are a new level.

[00:34:37.640] - Speaker 2
You've spent time in Georgia. Can you tell us about Georgia?

[00:34:41.460] - Speaker 1
Georgia is interesting. I think the time to invest in Georgia, at least for now, is probably passed because you have all this Russian money coming in. The currency shot through the roof. It was one of the best performing currencies against the dollar last year in a year when the dollar didn't do that badly because you had all this foreign currency coming in. I think we've had who have tripled their property investments in a couple of years because now there's just so much demand. So I always like to buy when things are down. Right now, George is buzzing. I think that it's really not much cheaper to live there anymore than it would be to live probably where you are. What I like about Georgia, though, is they have some of the best wines. They have an amazing cuisine. I wouldn't say that service in a restaurant is great, but if you get to know some people, if you said, Hey, you're coming to Georgia, Georgia. My entire staff, we have 20 people there in an office, would cancel their plans, and they would make sure you had the best experience for it, whether it's a day, a week, whatever.

[00:35:42.080] - Speaker 1
They really take care of guests. It's a very interesting place. I think that they're looking to be a little bit more European than, let's say, the Balkans. Someone who wants that extremely traditional view would probably have a better home in somewhere in the Balkans. But for someone who wants this interesting Eurasian crossroads experience with great food, great wine. Again, traditional. It's a very interesting place. They've really done a lot of innovations in terms of banking. You can open bank accounts there, you can pay your bills very easily. I have a couple of properties there. It just all runs on autopilot. It's extremely safe. They really came in and just got rid of all the crap.

[00:36:25.210] - Speaker 2
Where exactly is it located?

[00:36:27.770] - Speaker 1
East of Turkey, just a little bit but east of Turkey, south of Russia. Obviously, what people point to from the West is that there was a skirmish with Russia back in 2008. Obviously, we see now with Ukraine, it could have been much worse, but there's about 20 % of the territory that's occupied in Abkhazia and in the central northern region by Russia and their people. And then so, yeah, it's what's called the Kacassis Mountains. You're not that far from Iran. I mean, it's a neighborhood that Americans look at and say, and yet I think They did an incredible... We interviewed the old President. He's, unfortunately, found himself the victim of some political stuff. But he did an incredible job. He was Columbia-educated, turned the place around, told the IMF to go take a hike, and they slashed taxes, they slashed bureaucracy, they made everything transparent. I think they're slowing down a little bit now, but they were higher ranked in the US in terms of free economies for years. It's been amazing.

[00:37:31.940] - Speaker 2
If you were concerned about the war, what would be the safest places to move to avoid potential for war?

[00:37:42.180] - Speaker 1
I suppose a lot of the billionaires have gone to New Zealand. New Zealand and Australia have put up a very high price tag to move in there. I just don't think those places are worth it. I think that... For me, I'd like a place that's a backup that I could also enjoy. Most people I know who moved to New Zealand, they don't find it that enjoyable. It's a little boring. I think South America is interesting, and here's why. Most of the South American countries do immigration based on income. If you can show and make $1,000 or $2,000 or $800, whatever it is by the country, most of those countries, that's how they give you residence permits. Many of those countries do not require you to live there at all or a substantial part of the year in order to keep your residence permit. Now, if you want to get citizenship in those countries, you'll generally need to live there. But Argentina, it's as little as in two years. But I think that if you look at Southern hemisphere, it's a difference. What is it? Only 9% or 10% of the world's populations in South America.

[00:38:39.570] - Speaker 1
There are these leftist political movements, but guys like Doug Casey would tell you, they largely look at you as the foreigner and like, All right, he's bringing some. I'll leave the guy alone in this vineyard. It doesn't mean that will always be the case, but I think that you have tons of land available. It's affordable. Immigration is easy. You're far away from pretty much all the world's problems. That's why you never see countries talking about any of the problems that are happening in the world. They don't really pick aside. I think it could be a good geopolitical hedge because some of those countries are more Eastern leaning now. If I'm looking at the way the world is going to unfold in my lifetime, do I want to be only attached to countries that love the United States? I don't.

[00:39:19.900] - Speaker 2
Which countries in particular would you look at in South America?

[00:39:24.330] - Speaker 1
I think it's somewhat personal preference. There's a case for Chile, which is obviously one of the most developed. I mean, you walk through Santiago. Again, I didn't find it very interesting, but it feels to me in some ways like Vancouver, Canada. I don't know why, but it just feels very developed. They have a great passport. Chile, they're becoming more left-leaning, if that's an issue for you, but that's been a historically good one. Again, lots of land, not cheap, but if you have a bit more money, Chile could work. Argentina, despite all their problems, if you can keep your stuff outside of Argentina works. I suppose the one that probably makes the most sense on paper is Uruguay, the Switzerland of South America, you're really far away. Good passport, very much like a lot of Europeans that are living there. Again, I did not find it to be the most exciting place in the world, but that's probably the most strategic place that I would go. It's a blend of being reasonably priced, reasonable to get in. Everything's reasonable. Colombia, obviously, is not that far into it. I think Ecuador also could be interesting. You can get really, really cheap land if you want to be self-sufficient.

[00:40:29.340] - Speaker 1
I'm looking at every possible thing that could happen, Rick. Do I want to live in the jungles of Ecuador? It sounds nice, and yet I bet what I'm doing it. I'll be like, Okay, this is a little much. But I can see a point in time where you would like to have that option. If you could spend 50,000 to have a ton of land with banana trees and a little stream going through your land up to a couple of hundred thousand and build a house on the cheap. Those are four countries that I would look at.

[00:40:57.700] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the Nordic countries, Sweden, Sweden, Denmark, Finland.

[00:41:03.400] - Speaker 1
Norway was the first country I went to as an adult. It was the first language outside of school that I learned. I forgot everything because I went to Norway, and almost immediately, any of these countries where English is widely spoken. I started speaking in Norwegian, and they're just like, Yeah, just go down the street and you'll find what you're looking for. I'm like, Okay. I think Norway's beautiful. I like that those countries, they seem to be egalitarian in a way that the United United States pretends it is, but it's not. In that, for example, if you're single and you go on a date, she's going to insist on paying. There's true equality. There's true like, Hey, listen, we're all chipping in together. Taxes are high for pretty much everybody. If you go to prison, the goal is actually to be rehabilitated, not just like we lock you in a cage. I think people generally are looking out for each other. Now, I don't necessarily agree with the high taxes. I don't know why. For me, I've made the vast majority of my wealth while I'm traveling the world. Can you really assign that to a high school in the Cleveland, Ohio, area when there are kids in my class who have died of drug overdoses?

[00:42:09.280] - Speaker 1
Why aren't they also multimillionaires? I say to myself, if it's really about the individual, why do I want to live in a place where they're going to not only take half of my money, but publish how much I paid? They're beautiful countries. I love the people. I have a couple of Norwegian friends. It's just not countries that we interact with that much because I don't see an incredible investment potential. They're highly regulated, low returns. The currencies aren't even as stable as the Euro in some cases. There's no appeal to me other than I would love to visit Iceland and have a nice time, but nobody really is moving there. But I respect them for at least doing a perfect job of what they do. It's not like, Hey, this guy pays no taxes and you pay a lot of taxes, like the US. It's like, Listen, we're all chipping in. We're all getting government services. They're not as socialist as people think they are, by the way. But they're still… It's just at least it's what they believe in and it's done well rather than the smorgas board in the US. Just not my vibe.

[00:43:13.860] - Speaker 2
Understood. Let's talk about Africa.

[00:43:17.450] - Speaker 1
I've been to some places in Africa. I think that, again, I probably don't spend as much time because I think people are afraid of it. To a certain extent, I balance my life as marketable stuff that business can offer to people. I think Egypt is a very interesting place. I mean, I called investing in Istanbul a few years ago. You could buy property in Istanbul, Turkey, for $1,000 a meter. That even five years ago was what I would call extremely cheap. Forget about now with the inflation. I said, no matter what happens, Istanbul is still a mega city, and they're doing the right thing with manufacturing in that country. I've been proven right. Property prices, despite the currency crash, are through the roof in dollar terms, partially thanks to the war. I looked the same way at the place like Cairo, you've got a mega city in a very interesting part of the world, influential part of the world. I think that could be very interesting. They have their currency problems, they have some governance problems, but that's something that we're looking at very strongly. I think Rwanda is very well-run. That's increasingly talked about.

[00:44:21.300] - Speaker 1
East Africa, I mean, Kenya is on the scene for stuff like tech. I think tech, if you wanted to go and start a business and learn from zero at 18 10 years old, I would consider going to East Africa and getting into one of these tech spaces because there's a lot of innovation happening right now. Africa is going to skip some of the stuff that we had and are now replacing. They're just going to go right to the new thing. I think a lot of that innovation is happening in East Africa. I'm driven largely out of Nairobi. I think Rwanda for a local play is very interesting. I think Cairo for investment. By the way, to your point about war, I guess you could live in Mauritius or something. That's pretty far away from it all. They've got a pretty multicultural, well run island. I was there, and it's nice. I think there's a lot of opportunities in Africa. If I were a young kid, I would consider going there because the returns on some of this stuff are insane. But it is hard work. Those are a couple of plays that we're looking at.

[00:45:15.470] - Speaker 1
But obviously, you've got so many countries that would be impossible to keep up with.

[00:45:19.720] - Speaker 2
Let's talk about Mauritius a bit more since you've been there. Mauritius, Seychelles, that region, benefits, negatives.

[00:45:29.200] - Speaker 1
Yeah, that whole Indian Ocean region. I think Seychelles is known as one of these classic offshore jurisdictions like Belize. People set up trusts and they set up companies. It doesn't really work anymore. From our point of helping entrepreneurs, setting up shop in these far-flung islands really isn't what gets banks and everybody else to want to work with you. But to live, I don't know if the Seychelles offers as many opportunities. Mauritius is more on a radar because if you buy a home, for example, you can get permanent residence. If you live there and if they like you, you can get citizenship. That's a very eclectic, interesting citizenship. I think Mauritians are one of only four or five countries that can go to both Europe, Russia, China, and then have access throughout all of Africa. If you're predicting the future, that wouldn't be a bad passport to I have, I think it's relatively well laid out. It may be on some levels like a Malaysia, but there's no neighbors to it, so you don't have a lot of the trade going on regionally. But I would call it maybe something like that level of life. You're not going to have some of the conveniences, but if you want a bit slower pace of life where stuff at least works, it's one of those countries where I feel like the government is a little bit better than some of the people, maybe.

[00:46:42.070] - Speaker 1
It's really a remarkable story where they've done a good job making it a very well-respected country. They're one of only two countries in Europe where the citizens can visit Europe without a visa. So that tells you something.

[00:46:54.240] - Speaker 2
I was told a story by Leonard Cohn years ago. He owned a home in Greece, and he spent a lot of time in Greece. He spent a lot of time in Greece. One day, someone came to his house and said, You don't own this house. This is a house that's in my family, and it's not your house. It was a whole complicated legal thing that went on for a very long time. Are those types of stories still happening?

[00:47:19.990] - Speaker 1
I think in the cities, not so much. I think they've made improvements. Georgia, we mentioned, has moved towards the blockchain for keeping track of this kinds of stuff. But I'll tell you a story that happened in I don't think the property would have been taken from me, but of how things could have been difficult. I went to a city called Signahi, which is in the wine region. It's beautiful. It has Siena or Verona vibes. Anyone can get married 24 hours a day for $15 They give you a bottle of wine and a book of poems. It's a beautiful job they do. Right off the city center, I mean, right off the city center, there's $80,000. There's a foreclosure of the shell of a five-story building that you can make a hotel, a boutique hotel. I didn't want to be in the hotel business, but I thought, Let's check this out with one of my builder friends. We go out there, and the bank says, Okay, take the guy that we're foreclosing the property from, and he'll show you. It's very family-oriented. It's not so procedural. But then we're talking to this guy, How much is the property?

[00:48:15.660] - Speaker 1
It's $150,000. We're like, What are you talking about? We call the bank, No, it's $80,000. Basically, it came down to, Hey, listen, all these neighbors are my friends. I've known them for years. You don't want them screwing with you at every turn because they're with me. And so if you don't pay the $150, maybe he didn't say this exactly, but there's a a known commodity in the villages, for example. I own some land in Georgia, but it's not in a village. If it was in a village and I tried to build some beautiful house, people might push back. But I think there's a big difference in those countries between the villages and the cities, and the people in the cities look down on them. And I think unlike in New York, where Americans may have a point like, Oh, they're so... I think I'll side with the people in Tablisi or Athens because it's just like, Hey, let's follow the rules. Greece is a country that while it's in the EU, it has had some of those issues. I think that there's probably improvement. I think living in defined cities or resort areas is better.

[00:49:16.210] - Speaker 1
I don't know that it's as bad of like, you just don't own it. There's corruption in some places. I don't think it's bad as people think. I think the bigger issue is just being screwed with. I think if you know someone on the ground, which is what we help people do, you would know all those issues going in. If you just go in and think it's the same thing as buying property in Dana Point, California, you're in for a rude awakening. That goes back to that thing with Americans where it's like everything must function exactly the same. It doesn't. In Georgia, I can transfer a title to you today. Cost 20 bucks. That's been pretty easy. Now, there's some of the softer issues in a village. Other countries, it might take you a year to transfer a title. So every country is different. Some are better, some are better in different ways than others, but you've got to understand it's not the same.

[00:50:04.350] - Speaker 2
You have to be an expert in your role everywhere to be able to deal with these details in all these places because it is different everywhere.

[00:50:15.010] - Speaker 1
We run a service business with decent margins. And yet I said to myself, if the margins accounted for all of my years of going to places like Laos and doing everything that the guy from Dana Point, California, doesn't want to do, he just wants the end result. How do I I had a higher yield on my investment, my yields are zero. I make no profit. I mean, I've done stuff that most people wouldn't want to do. It's a constant process. I've got a team where we just call people and we suss out their information. You have to have a network on the ground. Now, again, in Ireland, are you going to be screwed? No. But the way the inspections on a property work once your offer is accepted, it's still different. It's not like, Oh, my God, someone's going to take advantage of you, but you still want to know how it works. But if you're going to Georgia, it's going to be different. Everyone I know who goes to some of these countries, they're like, I'm going to go look for my own properties. They come back and I'm like, You paid 20% too much.

[00:51:14.050] - Speaker 1
That's if you're lucky. I mean, Turkey has a program where you can get citizenship by making an investment in property. I guess now that Erdoğan got reelected, it's going to continue. You invest $400,000 in a property. I did that, and my property is up, I don't know, 30 or 40% in dollar terms. I'm like 300% in Lira terms. But a lot of people, they go and they buy these beautiful developments. Americans think, Oh, you buy a development, nothing wrong with that. The developments are just basically ways for developers to screw you because they're worth half in some cases immediately. If you don't know that, if you don't know who the bad builders are, you're going to be screwed. Does that mean that their country is such a disaster? No. I think that happens in some developments in the US. But what was that they were talking when Trump was running, Oh, the guy's in Tampa, he licensed his name to. They didn't build it. But it comes down to you've got to know how the other place works.

[00:52:08.140] - Speaker 2
Have you lived in primarily brutish country?

[00:52:12.390] - Speaker 1
I don't think I have. Where would that be? I mean, I spent a lot of time in China, like 12, 13 years ago, and I'm glad I did it then. There's obviously some parts of that are Buddhist, but most not. I'll tell you this, though. There's a great book called The Geography of Bliss. It's a bit old now, but they talked about countries like Bhutan and just how happy people are. Maybe you're curious, are the people happier? I don't know that it's only about Buddhist. I think that, again, Malaysia, Philippines, you've got some of the happiest people. That's a big change because you always hear in the West, Oh, the Danish are the happiest people. I mean, I don't know, maybe they are. I bought one of those books on the Danish art of happiness. The whole book is like, light a candle and have a piece of chocolate. I will compare, having been to all these countries in Europe, I will gladly put up the people in Southeast Asia as being just as happy. I was in Lesotho in Africa. I wasn't there long enough, but I got the sense that maybe some of those people are pretty happy.

[00:53:08.960] - Speaker 1
I think that happiness exists in interesting places.

[00:53:13.400] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the YouTube channel How did it start?

[00:53:16.820] - Speaker 1
I think my secret to success is I just put one foot in front of the other. When I started what was a blog, and I was in the process of selling everything in the US, I bought nomadcomplice. Com, and I figured, I'll just be a guy who travels, and I'll find investments in parts of the world, and I'll just work on my deals in whatever country. Maybe I can be a media creature and talk about it. I reserved the domain. I set up a radio show. It was like a podcast, but it was on the radio. That was my opportunity to interview all these guys and to build connections with consultants and people who, whatever, they did business in China, Mongolia, whatever else. We put this up on YouTube, and then I forgot about it for a few years. And then I just started saying, I want to have a voice on stuff that's happening and maybe speak to some of these misconceptions people have. It just exploded. I don't even know. I just think it was very entrepreneurial. You put some stuff out, people respond, you go here, you zig, you zag. And I come from a broadcasting background.

[00:54:19.630] - Speaker 1
I think it's a skill that I have. And it just got better and better and better. And I never really thought, are we reaching the right people? To me, it was about sharing the message. And from that, there's a lot of leakage in terms of people who just aren't going to work with you, especially when you do stuff that goes viral. You get a lot of people who just want to criticize the stuff we're talking about. Oh, this guy's in Mexico, getting ready to be killed. But I just always looked at it as the message. And yet, I guess from a top of the funnel perspective, you got enough of those people to say, Yeah, I like this. This is honest. I think that's what's been missing, Rick. When I came into this, everyone People said, Are you going to have a pen name? This is 2012. I was talking about doing this and sharing my expertise, and everybody in the industry had a pen name. They were using stock photos. I said, You know, that seems like '90s to me. People want transparency, and this business has a bad image. I want real entrepreneurs, the kinds that I hang out with, to want to go where they're treated best.

[00:55:23.360] - Speaker 1
I don't want shady people hiding under a rock. I want fully legal, fully above board, I want the people that that attracts. You're not going to get that by being like, Oh, here's a stock photo. For me, YouTube was a natural transition to, Let's bring some sunlight and show people this is not just for people who are trying to hide their money like the Wolf of Wall Street, the Swiss Bank. This is something you can do legally, and it's worth it.

[00:55:51.080] - Speaker 2
You recommended people from New York and California not moving to Florida and Texas, but to go further. Let's talk about that. It's interesting because I know so many people in California who move to Texas, and I know quite a few people in New York who move to Florida.

[00:56:07.490] - Speaker 1
The only exception I would say is if you're an expat for US tax purposes, removing your California domicile first is not a bad idea. But the idea of, I'm tired of California, so I'm going to move to Florida or Texas, whatever. First of all, from a tax perspective, Oh, the taxes are so much lower. Well, the biggest tax is the federal tax. For some people, even if you make A hundred grand in some cases, the bigger tax is the social security and Medicare, the payroll tax, if you're self-employed. I mean, sure, if you make millions of dollars a year, you can save decent money by moving to those places. You do see, by the way, It like Texas has much higher property taxes, so you're paying in some way. Again, the more money you make, the more you can arbitrage that. But if you're going to move, you might as well move. Number one, if you live in New York, I would bet that perhaps Dublin or London is harder to get into if you're not a citizen. But I'd argue that's more culturally relevant. Now, eventually, all the New Yorkers will go to Florida, and all the New Yorkers will bring New York politics to Florida, by the way.

[00:57:15.150] - Speaker 1
So you'll have some of the same problems again. I would argue that culturally speaking, if there's a place that's closer. If you're in California, maybe living in Baha would be better for you. Maybe living in somewhere in Southeast Asia would actually be more similar to what you're used to. But I just don't know why people go through this great effort. They talk about, Oh, my kids have to change schools if I go overseas. Well, your kids have to change schools if you move to Florida. So if you're going to do it, why don't you just do it and push the pedal all the way to the metal and just do it right? And so, yes, I have a business that focuses on the tax side. That's what makes money. You can save 90 % offshore, you can save 20 % in Florida. But I just happen to think that you're going to have to adapt regardless. Don't you You think?

[00:58:00.800] - Speaker 2
Yes. As part of that adaptation, let's talk about medical care in the US versus other places. Tell me about it.

[00:58:08.900] - Speaker 1
I go back to Malaysia, Prince Court Hospital. I mean, this place is like a museum. I did a check up there recently. They checked everything. They did ultrasounds, they did bone scans, they did everything. You actually got paid attention to by the doctor. I must have sat there and shot the breeze with her for 25 minutes. It was 300 bucks. She spent 10 years studying and living in She didn't go to some weird school. I don't think you can practice at that hospital if you didn't go to school in the UK. I think that the quality of care I've seen, I had an issue when I was in Thailand 10 years ago. I lost a bunch of weight, which I think living outside of the US just does to you. The doctor was just like, Listen, we checked you, you're fine. Go to McDonald's, have a hamburger. I contrast that to when I got a contact stuck in my eye and it cost $2,000 to go to the emergency room, and I'm I'm like, some scared kid. I'm like, Could I die? They're like, We can't roll it out. I'm like, Listen, how about you charge me 300 bucks?

[00:59:08.800] - Speaker 1
You do a full review. You're pleasant. You actually listen to me rather than bum rushing me out in 30 seconds. It's like real care. When people say, Hey, that's the flip side of things being a bit less formal than they are in the US in these countries. Is there a bit less formal in all the good ways, too? Thailand is good for health care. Malaysia is my personal I guess Singapore is not really any cheaper. But I've gotten good care all around the world. The worst health care I've gotten has been in the United States. And look at what you pay for it.

[00:59:39.500] - Speaker 2
Why do you think people are so nice in other parts of the world and people in the US don't seem to manage that? What do you think it is?

[00:59:47.420] - Speaker 1
I imagine there's places in the US where people are nice. But I think that the political system, I've been watching it my entire life. It's been divide and conquer my entire life. Obviously, politics exist everywhere. But I think people really... I mean, first of all, you have a country that's so different in so many ways. I mean, look at Europe. I mean, Moldova. There's parts of Moldova that want to break off. Listen, we're nothing like those guys 20 miles away. It's really remarkable how the US has stayed together, but you're seeing how people with different views are at each other's throats now. Listen, I believe in work. I'm a workaholic. I don't want to say sitting around and doing nothing is the answer, but I will say that people who have goals beyond materialism exist outside of the US. That's the one thing I get upset when people pick on the US is let them do what they want, but obviously, it's not leading to happiness for many people. Again, I go back to the malaise. What are their goals? I want to wake up, I want to have three good meals. The question you ask someone in Malaysia, if you want to show you care, what would you ask your kids?

[01:00:52.180] - Speaker 1
Have you eaten? It's an eating culture. People want to eat. The local population, their goal is to buy a bike, and then their goal is to buy a local made Produa or Proton car. Obviously, the Malaysian-Chinese, maybe they want to buy the Mercedes. But the local, the Malay people who run the country, they don't have a lot of aspirations. I think there's something that we can learn from that. I could never be at that level, but I'm closer to that level being around people who are just genuinely nice. Being fake nice, and then the moment someone raises their voice five decibels and you start exploding at them, that's not nice. Nice is I'm just chill all the time. I take nothing personally. I wish nobody ill. And it really is remarkable. I mean, by the way, you'll meet, my wife had these friends, some of the most stunning women in the world. And they're just genuinely like, Oh, I wish everybody well. No pettiness, none of that. And I think that's probably true in a lot of these places, but it's true. It seems like it's true with the weather's weather, by the way. When you don't have to worry about preparing for winter, that It seems like that helps.

[01:02:02.120] - Speaker 2
It seems like weather is a key. I know for me, weather is a key in the choices that I make of where I go and when. We can choose to live in a summer-like experience all year long if we choose to. Absolutely. Is this correct?

[01:02:15.090] - Speaker 1
What I found was I don't want four months. I grew up with five months of snow. But you know what? It's nice to have two weeks of snow. Whether you buy a ski chalet as an investment somewhere or you just rent something, I think it's nice to go to the Christmas US markets in Europe. You want a little snow. Go and see the Nut Cracker at the Opera House. To say summer, 365 days a year, I think probably gets old, but you get to choose just exactly how much you want.

[01:02:42.520] - Speaker 2
Let's talk about education in different parts of the world.

[01:02:46.260] - Speaker 1
My philosophy, were to have children, and I've talked about this, I would hire a tutor. I think the people who want to live in the Western countries, you can. I mean, you can go to countries like Ireland. It's tax friendly. People are nice. But I think that Western countries are going to follow a more progressive education model that some of the people that I talk to don't want their kids to hear. You can certainly send your kids to international schools in any of the places that we've talked about, they exist. They're good. You can certainly homeschool, and there are many countries that allow you to do that, including most of the ones we've talked about today. For me, I would say, where can I find... When you do this global citizenship thing, here's an extra benefit. If you run a business, you say, where can I hire people? Some of our best team members are making triple what all their friends make in their country, and it's one-third what we'd pay in the US, and they're three times as good, and the attitudes are better because they're hungry. The same thing I would apply to, Let me find a tutor for my child.

[01:03:43.030] - Speaker 1
At this point, I'm looking for, if I'm going to buy a new house, is there a room somewhere for a tutor to live, looking forward? If homeschooling is allowed in the countries we're talking about, you can create your own curriculum and have someone who's an experienced person who knows By the way, talk about the Balkans. Some of the most educated people on geography, history, et cetera, I'd rather have them teaching my kids about that stuff than someone in the United States. Let's find the best educators in the world for our kids. And again, if you move to Malaysia, just let's run down that example. Your cost of living versus New York is 70 % less, something like that, whatever lifestyle you choose. Your taxes are potentially 8 to less. You've got a lot of money, suddenly, even if you're not a gazillionaire, to say, Yeah, I'm going to hire a private tutor from Romania, the best, and pay them $50,000 a year. My Malaysia immigration pass allows me to bring one personal staff member in on my pass. I don't have to get them their own immigration. That's very doable. By the way, not only the savings, but I would imagine the education will be substantially better.

[01:04:58.520] - Speaker 2
Our experience is we have a tutor who we met in Costa Rica, and she wasn't allowed to come. She's not allowed in the United States. She's Costa Rican. So that's another issue. She's Costa Rican. So that was an issue of like, if his teacher can come, do we even want to come back.

[01:05:16.710] - Speaker 1
Yeah, the US. People don't realize. I got another thing Americans don't realize. I remember my parents came to Malaysia and we had a dinner with one of my friends from Egypt. They said, Oh, have you visited the US? And I'm like, Guys, she's a A 35-year-old single woman from Egypt, and this was during when Trump was in, and whether you agree or not, they were talking about the Muslim ban. She's not practicing Muslim, but she is by birth Muslim. Those people don't get visas. I mean, look at the adjusted refusal rates for visas. It's probably 50% in Egypt, right? And many people don't even bother trying. If your goal was to hire a tutor who could go to the United States, the work requirements, I'm sure, are very complicated. I don't deal with all that. But I Just the fact that they be working for you could be an issue, but you'd have to hire someone from Croatia or something or Poland. They recently got access to the US. You could do that if that was a goal, and you could work at the legalities of having them work for you three months a year.

[01:06:16.480] - Speaker 1
But the US is one of the least inviting places, and people don't realize how difficult it is. When I got set up with my residents in Ireland, I think we got an answer in three weeks, and they actually made a mistake the first time, and we emailed them. They overly apologized for their mistake, and they corrected it within 24 hours. I know US immigration attorneys who are waiting for their clients five years, and they've got to sue the government just to get someone a decision. So go where you're treated best, man. Go to the US in the summer or something.

[01:06:46.480] - Speaker 2
Tell me a bit about passports.

[01:06:48.610] - Speaker 1
Well, I got about five these days. I got rid of the US one because I just felt it was not going to be easy going forward to be an expat. I never particularly cared for the identity, obviously in a place like Ireland, people hear the accent, but most places they don't. I think everyone needs at least two. I think three could be a good idea. If you have someone in your family tree, that could be an option for practically nothing.

[01:07:15.270] - Speaker 2
How easy is that?

[01:07:17.610] - Speaker 1
Well, everything's easy and nothing's easy. In my case, I just spent nine years, some years more active than others, running around the world collecting documents for my Lithuanian citizenship. At the end, they left two years too early, sorry. But we had to go to various locations. I had a friend doing it for Romania. He had to go to the village, and then he finds that the village, whatever town hall, burned down. Sometimes it's easy. Sometimes you have the record sitting in your safe at home, and that's just, okay, we put together the case, we file it. Sometimes you've got to go schlepping all over the world to find some... I had to find a piece of paper from the US saying, My ancestor was Lithuanian. I said, They don't really do that in the US. Once you're American, you're American, right? It's not We finally found something, but at the end, it wasn't good enough. We have people who they just, Hey, my grandfather was Italian. Here's the documents. We file it and it's done. We have some like mine where it's nine years of off and on palavera But the benefit of that is we help people get citizenship in the Caribbean and other countries where they're making a donation or in Turkey, they're buying property.

[01:08:24.330] - Speaker 1
It's economic. Bring in some cash, we'll give you citizenship in a matter of months. That's efficient. If you need a citizenship quickly, that's probably the fastest way to do it. Italian, you might wait three, four, five years, even if your case is easy. Just defiling because they're not in a hurry. But the benefit of Italian, I might do both. I might get a Caribbean citizenship as a backup plan now. I might look at where I can move to get citizenship now. We mentioned Ecuador or something that's different. Then I would get the one through my family tree because if I'm Italian, I can live anywhere in Europe. Now I've got 30 different countries, whether it's taxes, freedom, whatever I'm looking for, that's a lot of options, almost like 30 different states I can move to. People pooh-pooh Turkey. I'm not saying Turkey is for everybody, but the fact that I can buy property, if I buy it correctly, I won't lose money. I can sell it in three years, and I get a citizenship to keep for life from a country that, look at what they've done in the war, they're playing it neutral. They have the economic heft to do that.

[01:09:23.840] - Speaker 1
It's a growing country. It's a little bit off the radar, but maybe off the radar is what you want sometimes. In the same in a way that I wouldn't mind being Ecuadorian. I wouldn't mind being Nicaraguan. Everybody complained, Oh, Nicaragua. I had a guy from Nicaragua come to a party and say, I have the worst passport. I said, No, you have one of the best passports, but why was he the worst in his mind? He can't go to the US. That's his only metric for whether the passport is good or not. He needs a visa, and they don't like Nicaraguans that much. He can go to the UK. He can go to Europe. He can get a residence permit anywhere he wants, but he can't visit the US without a visa. Well, if you're already or if you're already European, you can go to the US without a visa. You want something a little different in the mix. If you can get the similar European passport as an American through your family tree, just take it. It's practically free. But for what I would intentionally create, I want a place that leaves me alone. I want something different.

[01:10:20.530] - Speaker 2
I've never considered leaving the US, even though I probably, in the last five years, have spent no more than three or four months per a year in the US. Just hearing you talk makes me wonder, what would that look like?

[01:10:37.100] - Speaker 1
To give up citizenship.

[01:10:38.680] - Speaker 2
Again, never considered it before, but I'm interested.

[01:10:42.850] - Speaker 1
Well, to give up your citizenship, it's obviously a big move. I think that we had people who was only a financial thing as clients, a lot of these cryptocurrency people, because the US is really the only country. There's a few that do it, but the US is the only country that really full scale taxes you no matter where you live. Just because you're a citizen. Every other country, Hey, I'm Canadian. I'm not going to live here anymore. It's harder than people think, but you can come back for two or three months a year and you can say, I'm Canadian passport holder, Canadian citizen, but I live somewhere else Stop taxing me. The US, you can't. Now, there's the foreign earned income exclusion. You can have a foreign corporate. There's things you can do. You can get it down to some percentage. You can potentially get it down to zero for some people. Others might get it down to 10%-ish. You're still They're financially saving taxes. But we've had people... Now, if you're doing investing, you can't save those taxes. Only active income really can be protected from US tax. So some people say, That's unfair.

[01:11:41.840] - Speaker 1
I don't want to pay. And they make a financial decision. I think it's always much more complicated than that. I've had people who make millions, and they just want to come back and visit their grandmother, and they wouldn't give it up because they're afraid they can't come back. Our experience has been, if you give it up and you have a good passport. Let's say you get one of those ancestry passports. People have come back on those through the visa waiver program. Now you're limited in the US the same way you were limited, you're talking about going to Italy. You can't live there. But if you do not have one of the 32 or so passports, you would have to get a visa like anybody else. I would imagine if you're a loudmouth as I am and you talk about how the US is going the wrong direction, a lot of people in the consular office probably take that a little personally. Some of these guys in some of these countries get paid bonuses to reject a certain number of people. I'm sure in Nicaragua, it's like, Hey, listen, if you reject 50% of people or more, we give you a cash bonus because they have an overstate problem.

[01:12:45.270] - Speaker 1
Don't you think that if you're working towards a quota, the evil, nasty trader would be an easy guy to reject? And yet, maybe if you're Rick Rubin, maybe it's like, Hey, we get it. We've had people who've given up citizenship to get another one where they can't have All right, we get it. But if you don't have one of those 42 or so great passports where you can generally just come back in, by the way, even then, criminal record, drug use, if you've been to Iran or Somalia, you're still going to be out. You really have to decide, Can I live without the US? If you can, then you're off the hook for taxes, you're off the hook for everything else. They don't bother you. There's no filings, there's no regulations.

[01:13:25.720] - Speaker 2
Tell me about your book.

[01:13:27.260] - Speaker 1
I wrote the book Nomad Capitalist. I've always wanted to write a book since I was six years old, and I thought sharing some of the stories would be a good idea. One of the things that the people who don't like the book are critical of is there's not a lot of actionable stuff. The actionable stuff in my world changes by the week. We're not just like, Hey, move to Dubai. We'll set up your company, get your residence permit. I think we put together a list. We've helped clients with 82 different countries, something like that. 31 tax-friendly countries moved to. This stuff changes by the week. If you put together a how-to guide, it'll be out of date. But it's largely a collection of stories that help you realize the stuff we're talking about. Hey, here's how this works. Hey, have you considered this? And so there's the good, Oh, my goodness, I never thought that was possible. People don't realize my grandfather was Italian. I could get Italian citizenship, and I can live anywhere in Europe or not. It's an option. And there's also the bad. Yeah, you can't just walk into a bag in Singapore with 50 bucks and say, Give me an account.

[01:14:30.930] - Speaker 1
And so I think it hopefully gives people a guideline for starting this, what's possible and what's not, by telling stories of my experiences around the world. So it's designed to be inspirational, and it aggregates some of that content into one place.

[01:14:46.590] - Speaker 2
Can you give examples of some of the changes in, let's say, that last 10 years, something that you may have recommended 10 years ago that is impossible anymore?

[01:14:55.000] - Speaker 1
My understanding of that would be, for example, I have a bank account in Singapore. You cannot get a bank account I have there, and they don't want to upgrade me because they look at me as like, You don't live here. We don't really like you. But they don't close my bank account that I have now. If I want this super fancy bank account, I'm not going to get upgraded to that.

[01:15:11.420] - Speaker 2
It's grandfathered in.

[01:15:12.940] - Speaker 1
Yes, that's the term I've used. Yes, I am grandfathered. Now, there's other banks in Singapore where they're like, Oh, yeah, please come in. We'd love to have you as our private banking client. And so there are other options. But I think banks have become increasingly difficult. The level of scrutiny to open these accounts has become even more difficult. The biggest thing I've seen is the closing residents and citizenship programs. To me, if I want the ultimate protection, I'd like to have citizenship or secondarily residents in different countries where I can go. Look at during the pandemic, right? Am I welcome or am I not welcome? If I'm a citizen, I'm welcome. In some cases, if I'm a resident, like in Colombia, I was able to fly above all the restrictions because I was a permanent resident. As a tourist, you couldn't come. And once you were in the country, when I was there, it was pretty good. But I had that higher status. Most of those programs, I mean, a lot of those programs have gone away. We just saw the recent closure of the Portugal Golden Visa. That was a program where if you're in, you can get European citizenship in about five years.

[01:16:13.000] - Speaker 1
Now, the wait times are a little bit ridiculous. But once you're approved, it's five years, you learn a little Portuguese, very basic, and you get citizenship by spending a week a year there. So that was if you don't have the family tree, that's a way to get into Europe and have that access to be able to travel as good as an American does, to be able to live all over Europe, and now it's gone. So all the good programs keep getting killed. And who came with a new program this year? Namibia. Most Americans are not going to want to go to Namibia. Eventually, Ireland also closed their golden visa. They've got other ways. Now, these countries have other ways you can move there. But the idea of you don't have to commit to us, that's going out the window over the last 10 years. You can move to Portugal now on a self-sufficient visa, but you got to live there six seven, eight months. So if you're just looking for an option, that ain't working for you anymore. And so the country that allows the options is not going to give you that top-tier EU passport in five years.

[01:17:10.240] - Speaker 1
So I just think it's like countries are just saying, We're worth it. And you may not think as an American that this is why did they keep raising the price? Because everybody outside of the West wants a backup plan, and increasingly, they can afford it. The market, I was the only guy until the pandemic talking about Americans getting second passports. People thought I was a loon. Now it's becoming the biggest growth market of the world because Americans are realizing, oh, my God, during the pandemic, we were stuck. Our passport was as good as an African passport. So now it's a growth market. But the market for years has been the 90% of people who are not Western, and they are driving up the price. So you're just seeing fewer and fewer places that you can go. But once you're in, if you have a Portugal golden visa now, you will still be able to follow that path. So I think it's an issue that people think, oh, there's always going to be... It's It's a very American thought. There's always going to be an option available, and there will. But last year was Portugal, and this year it's Namibia.

[01:18:06.830] - Speaker 1
Would it just be easier just to do it when you have the option you want?

[01:18:10.040] - Speaker 2
For the people who got the Portugal passport when they could, they have the Portugal passport forever. It's not revoked because the program went.

[01:18:19.540] - Speaker 1
They got Portugal residence, and they're working towards a passport, and they're grandfathering everybody who was into that residence, into the rules, right? So there's a golden visa. There's a golden visa, there's a residence where you're working towards it. What was cool about Portugal is you don't have to be there very much to do that working. If you want to be a US citizen, you got to live there practically full-time for five or six years and pay taxes and everything else. These other countries are saying, Don't pay us tax. Don't come that often. Just poke your head in once in a while, and we'll put you on the same track to citizenship because you made an investment. That's what's increasingly going away. But yeah, unless you've committed fraud, unless you say, if I apply for Caribbean citizenship, I'm St. Lucian. If I lied, same as in any country, they can take it away. But as long as you didn't lie, it's yours for life. And not only that, if you're a Portuguese citizen, now your children can become. They can pass it down. You're making a decision that will last generations. To go to your point of education, by the way, to go to your point of education, if you're an EU citizen, you're going to have special privileges to talk about how to save hundreds of thousands of dollars versus sending your kids to university in the US.

[01:19:27.510] - Speaker 2
Tell me about banking in different parts of the world. If you're an American citizen, is there a benefit in having a banking relationship outside of the US?

[01:19:34.640] - Speaker 1
For sure. I don't want to keep all my eggs in one basket. If you're an American, you do need to file some forms. If you work with the tax people that we work with who know international stuff, it's very easy and very, very inexpensive. My tax bill actually went down for tax prep when I left the US. So it doesn't have to be expensive. But most domestic accountants will not know how to handle those forms, so you'll get in trouble. But it's not that hard. That's the legal caveat. There's never been a bank failure that I'm aware of in Singapore. The last one in Austria was in 1931. You saw three high-profile bank failures in the US just this year. And what was it? It was the FDIC, Should we pay everybody? Should we not? How do I feel today? What is my mood today? Should we pay the people or not? That scares me. If you look at the safest banks in the world, there are none in the top 50 that are in the US. And so I just say to myself, I can earn higher interest rates in many cases overseas. I can be in other currencies as a hedge.

[01:20:35.910] - Speaker 1
I can be in safer banks. Now, Canadian and Australian banks are safer. There are some of those in the top 50, so there's less of an impetus if you're there. But look at what happened in Canada last year. You gave money to something that we don't like. We're going to freeze your account. Again, somehow, if they did that in Russia, people will be up in arms. If they do it in Canada, whatever. Who knows what could happen? I woke up one day Many, many, many years ago. California took a bunch of money out of my account. You didn't pay your taxes for the year that you were living here. I had a canceled check that I did pay my taxes, but that was not of interest to them. I had to spend weeks and months fighting them. And what if I needed that money to pay something? Would it have been nice to have some money that they had to go through a little bit more due process than just waking up and pushing a button to freeze? And so that happens to people who do things legally all the time. You've seen the story as the woman sells burritos and bank flags here for depositing too much cash, and she's got to spend her entire life savings.

[01:21:34.440] - Speaker 1
I mean, okay, those are isolated examples. But do I trust one country with the entirety of my life savings? I don't know why anyone would.

[01:21:43.560] - Speaker 2
And you would say the best time to start this would be now. There'd be no reason to project, Oh, someday I'll grow into being able to do this. Then I'll start thinking about having a second residency.

[01:21:55.730] - Speaker 1
If you say, Hey, listen, I'm just going to go down with the ship no matter what happens, I guess you don't need do it. But I'll tell you, we saw this during the pandemic. We had people who were watching us for years, and they said, Okay, this is fun. My friend calls it... He's like, Your business is like a romance novel for men. A lot of people watch it, and they're just like, Oh, that sounds exciting. But they're not going to do it. And suddenly people started doing it. Oh, my God, I'm stuck. I can't travel. I don't have any freedom anymore. And they were calling. Now, the citizenship by investment countries, where you make a donation, they give you a passport, they actually sped up because they wanted to be able to get more money. Suddenly, they digitized things. They improved. That's an argument from my side for having smaller countries that realize where their bread is buttered. But those people, I mean, It was still taking a little bit longer. And some of them, they had some adverse consequences. It could have been they couldn't go where they wanted to go to get out.

[01:22:52.660] - Speaker 1
They missed business meetings because they couldn't travel. Some of them, the US, it was not allowing people to renounce. I think there There were six embassies at one point that were open for you to renounce. And so people who were making a lot of money, we had people who started making money during the pandemic. They became genius traders or crypto investors. They started a Shopify business. And suddenly, they're bumping up against that $2 million that if you have less than, you can renounce and your life is easy. And if you're more than, your life is hard. And they couldn't figure it out, and they couldn't get the passport in time. And so I just... I never knew what would happen, but I just said it's a good idea to be diversified. And I've seen seen how I've saved money and saved hassle by having passports, residences, bank accounts, ahead of time. It's always paid off for me. So I think if you believe in doing it, you got to do it now because the options are... The good options are going to shrink. Number one, don't be so dogmatic against Turkey or Namibia or whatever else, but realize the options that you're going to be most comfortable doing are the ones that everyone wants, and they're eventually going to go away, whether it's because of pressure from the EU, whether it's because just the country is rich enough.

[01:23:59.310] - Speaker 1
I mean, Ireland It has a €2 billion surplus. I know that no one in the US knows what that means, right? That means they took in more money than they spent. They don't need any more money. They need workers. If you want to work and you're going to have a good paying job, they want you to come and work, and that could include you start your own company and work and hire a few Irish people. Fine, we're all for that. We need jobs. We need more workers, but we don't need more money. So why would we have a program that allows people to invest and come and live here and work towards a passport? We don't need it.

[01:24:30.250] - Speaker 2
The idea of talent is an interesting one. If you remember when Amazon decided they were going to open a second home base and they had a contest, why doesn't that happen with people as well? Why aren't people enticed to come to places based on talent in different parts of the world?

[01:24:50.240] - Speaker 1
I think there are some that do do that. I mean, there was a mini explosion on the island of Sark, not so far from here, one of the British Crown dependencies, I think it is. No taxes of any kind, no rules. Everyone come to Sark, and it's just a tiny little island. But they were doing stuff like that during the pandemic, come to Sark. Chile, for example, had started up Chile for many years. We'll just give you money. Come and start your startup here. Here's some cash. We don't want to just take our cash. So there are examples of that. I think that, again, you and I come from an American background, and I think what we see is people really give a pass to where they're from, and they pooh-pooh everything else. We have people who watch our stuff, and I'll say, Oh, come to our event in Mexico last two years, or come in Malaysia. The comments we get from people. They would think that the population of Mexico is zero because everyone's been killed. It's just shocking the dogma people have. And I think that's why you don't see it covered. But there are countries that are doing that stuff.

[01:25:59.850] - Speaker 1
Why don't people demand countries compete? People need to say, My country is the best, almost why they need their sports team to win. I mean, I come from Cleveland. The Cleveland Browns won zero one season. I don't know how you support a team that wins zero. I don't want to be... What? Because I'm born, because my mother was hanging out in this area of the country, and we just started like, Now I'm going to support this terrible sports team? But people do. It's part of their identity, I guess. I don't get it. But yes, people should say, hey, what's the best place to start a business? And it's not just low taxes, because some of these places in the Gulf that have very low taxes, you can't get a bloody notary to show up for three months. So that's not the answer. But to me, breaking things down into parts is the answer. Where's the best place to bank? That's probably not the best place to live. If I'm living in Italy, I don't want to be banking in Italy other than for day to day transactions. But Italy has a lump sum tax regime where they say, okay, pay us our little chunk every year, and we'll leave you alone, do whatever else you want offshore.

[01:27:04.660] - Speaker 1
I'm going to bank in Singapore, or I'm going to bank in Switzerland, next door. People don't break it down into constituent parts, first of all, and then they get into the dog. We could go on about this all day, but I think that's the reason.

[01:27:16.050] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the strengths and weaknesses of America today from your perspective.

[01:27:21.660] - Speaker 1
I think the dog was a big weakness. I'm a big believer in self-awareness. If you take two employees, and one is from a part of Eastern Europe where their only goal defending themselves, and it's a win or lose. I'll take the person with more nuance over that who can say, Hey, you know what I got? I made a mistake, and I'm learning from it. I don't think a country with 300 million people does a lot of self-awareness, especially in its position. Thinking will always be the best because if you're a limited version of history, it's not a very good way to be successful. Shaking things up and attracting things is a good way to be successful. I think that's a serious weakness. I think that people in much of the West have been spoiled. I don't think it's what builds successful societies. For the first time ever, you have competition. Steve Banon was the Trump advisor who said, We hollowed out the middle class in the United States to build one in Asia. As if Asia does not deserve to have a middle class, go and eat your rice and accept your $1 a day.

[01:28:19.580] - Speaker 1
That's the way that people think it should be. I mean, let's be honest. When the Iraq war happened, everyone's like, Oh, this is terrible. I said, Yeah, if gas becomes $6 a gallon, they'll say, Hey, what other countries can be invaded because I need cheaper gas. Nobody cares. I just think that this detachment from reality that other countries aren't going to become more successful. We had 50 some % extreme poverty in 1960. It went down to 8 % before the pandemic. Other people are getting wealthy. There are going to be other places to go. A guy like me, I have two American employees, and they don't live in the US. I've gone where I'm treated best, and I found the best talent. Oftentimes, it's more affordable. That means that's 60 people who I might have hired in the US in a different life who weren't being hired there. What are the strengths? The US is an entrepreneurial culture. My fear with that, and people say, even in Canada, we leave Canada to go to the US because Canada cuts down the tall trees. You do hear that in some Western cultures. That's why you see entrepreneurs go to the US.

[01:29:28.070] - Speaker 1
My challenge with that is, it's such a small percentage of the population. The other population is increasingly saying, We don't want to work. I go on LinkedIn. It's like every reason to not work, and that's being accepted. I don't know how you have 2% of the population that drives an uncooperative 98%, and you get a lot of stuff done. I just don't know how it works. There is a sense of entrepreneurship, and maybe there's something I'm missing, but I just don't think that they're leaders in freedom anymore. I I think they're leaders in the brand called freedom. You look at all the politicians. It's such a fungible concept, freedom. We have freedom. What does that mean? Nobody can tell you. That, to me, is when you realize, again, if I told an employee, define what you just said, some corporate employee. Tell me what that means. And they can't? That means you don't have it. I think that besides that entrepreneurial spirit, which will increasingly be at odds with people who don't want to work, I don't know what there is other than your own personal issues. Yeah. I just like it here. Okay. Would you like it somewhere else?

[01:30:38.490] - Speaker 2
Got to check it out. It was something you said earlier about living in a place where the people are happy. That sounds like a really nice choice.

[01:30:47.450] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I mean, I've always been go, go, go. I didn't optimize much of my life for happiness. But a number of years ago, my wife said to me, we would go to all these different to say, wow, these people here are really kind. And I realized that's a value. Not even niceness. I mean, niceness is almost fake, polite, whatever. Kindness. That is important. And I'll take it one step further. In Georgia, some of the most loyal friends you'll ever have I think in any place like that where it's a little bit more laid back, and more family-oriented and smaller and everybody knows each other to a certain extent. I mean, I could tell you, first of all, everyone I know has left something in a taxi in Georgia, and the guy comes and finds them and brings it back. Five thousand dollar camera. Hey, you forgot this. I had things where I needed help right away. Somebody came. In the US, they wouldn't do that. We're busy. So You start to realize I'm a big believer in work and building things that you're passionate about. But it's also nice to say, Hey, when your friends need help, you'd be there.

[01:31:53.620] - Speaker 1
You'd set that aside. I don't think people in the US would have. So I think kindness is key, and I think loyalty is key. And I think there's probably a lot of that lacking in the US and probably most other Western countries these days.

[01:32:08.020] - Speaker 2
Beautiful. Thank you so much for sharing this information. I think it's really helpful. Most of the people who grew up where I grew up still live in the same town that I grew up in, most of them. The idea that there's much more available to us if we're willing to experiment and look and see what's there. I feel like your work really inspires that curiosity Well, I appreciate that.

[01:32:32.340] - Speaker 1
There's a lot of opportunities, and I think that it's definitely worth people reviewing all the options, considering how many more options there are now than there were 25 years ago. The world has changed remarkably, and I think we have to update our own operating systems to reflect that.

[01:32:51.370] - Speaker 2
Great. Thank you so much.

[01:32:53.240] - Speaker 1
My pleasure.
