RR:  Will Smith

(Time:  0:00)

WS:	This is great man!  

RR:	It’s a good hang.

WS:	This is a beautiful way to start the day.  Yes.  Goodness.

RR:	I was going to actually suggest that we start with a little guided meditation that will expand our consciousness.  Are you up for it?

WS:	I love it.  Yes sir.

RR:	Okay, we’ll close our eyes.

(sound of deep breathing)

RR:	Imagine yourself filling this room so you’re no longer just in your body, but you expand out to the walls of the room.  And now expand it to the whole building.  Fill yourself to the whole building.  Now let’s do the whole town that we’re in.  Fill ourselves out to the edges of the town.

(deep breathing)

RR:	And now we can out to the state, the whole state.  

WS:	(coughs) I guess going to the whole state made me cough.

(laughing)

RR:	A lot of dust in the rest of the state.  So now we’re in the state and now we can expand to the whole planet.  We can fill the planet and it feels good.  It feels good to be out there.  Now we can expand to the whole universe.  Let’s be free.  And from that sense, you and I can now come back and have a conversation.  We are now united in this cosmic way, which is a really nice way to get things rolling.  

WS:	Mmm mm.  Love that.  

RR:	Do you see a spiritual dimension in your work?

WS:	Absolutely.  At this point in my life, I’m looking for the blend of my spiritual life more overtly into my work and I’ve never done that.  Even the idea of starting in that way, that’s a gorgeous beautiful way to begin.  I was raised as a Christian, so my grandmother would start everything with a prayer.  For whatever reason, I made the decision that my spirituality was private and I would, you know, sneak it into my work through my being more than . . . you know, or overtly in that way that you just started.  That’s a beautiful way to begin.  

RR:	Cool.  And by the way, it’s just as good.  I don’t think people like to be told what to think, how to act.  We embody, we live the way we live and it embodies an energy, and we bring that to everything we do.  We can’t help it.

WS:	Absolutely.  You can’t not.  Right, absolutely, for sure.

RR:	So if there’s an aspect of spirituality in your life, it’s bound to arrive in your work.  

WS:	Yes, absolutely.  For sure.  I would say everything that I have ever done has always been centered on a base of contribution, right?  I learned really young, I was taught really young in my family that your actions are inexorably bound to every other person.  I was always, starting with my family, I wanted to create things that wouldn’t embarrass my mother at work.  So I always felt the sense of responsibility and connection.  In terms of my spirituality, it’s the core of everything that I do.  Always trying to balance my desires as an individual with my responsibility to the collective.  

RR:	It always has seemed from the beginning that you’ve had an ability to entertain.  I remember my first experience was your first single.  I remember when I heard that and I loved it.  It was over the I Dream of Jeannie . . .

WS:	Yeah, I Dream of Jeannie.

RR:	Which was so cool.  Everything about it was cool.

WS:	Yeah, that’s Jazzy Jeff.

RR:	And your character was really different.  I remember.  It wasn’t bragging, it wasn’t about you, you were making fun of yourself.

WS:	Yeah, self-deprecating was like the  . . . 

RR:	And that was like a taboo in hip hop.

WS:	(laughing)  

RR:	No, seriously.

(Time:  5:00 minutes)

WS:	Exactly.  My family and I talk about this all the time.  Life is hilarious to me.  It takes everything I have not to laugh at the things that happen in life.  Because I know people take them really seriously.  But it has been such a gift to me throughout my life and career that like shit is hilarious to me.

RR:	And ridiculous.  You can’t believe it.

WS:	It is absolutely absurd.  We can be infuriated by the absurdity or we can enjoy it.  It’s been such a gift for me that the more difficult and the more tragic that things seem, my mind, maybe partially as a defense mechanism, but partially as just how I see the world, things are hilarious to me.  Like how all of this stuff comes together and happens, and how God or the universe or spirit, whatever you believe, how it brings all the things together is amazing and hilarious to me.

RR:	When you were a kid, did you want to be an actor?  Was that your dream in life?

WS:	I think based on my childhood, I had an early recognition that nobody’s mad when they’re laughing.  That nobody’s dangerous when they’re laughing.  And as much as you could keep people entertained, the safer you’d be in this world.  So I directly correlated being funny with safety.  And then later it became more conscious and directly correlated with love; that people love you when you make them laugh, right?  And I had a direct experience in my childhood with my father.  He was abusive and I grew up in Philly, and fighting was a real thing.  So comedy and love was always above fear and force to me.  I picked funny as the way I was gonna move through this world.

RR:	And it worked.

WS:	Yeah, it definitely worked.

RR:	It worked for you.  

WS:	And then funny combined with story.  I learned really young that, hey, let me tell you a story is MAGICAL for human connection.  As my way of being and something’s that really at the core of who I am, riveting people with a story and comedy is a part of my blueprint.  It’s what I came here as.  That’s a big chunk of what I’m here to do.  

RR:	Beautiful.  In listening to your first two singles, it definitely sounds like you’re inspired by Slick Rick and Rick was known as . . . that was his whole thing, was the storyteller.

WS:	The storyteller, yep, absolutely.  

RR:	Everything was like once upon a time.  It feels like once upon a time.

WS:	Absolutely.

RR:	And there’s also something beautiful about that in that the idea that the stories are like mythology.  They’re bigger than what’s real.  

WS:	Yes, absolutely.  And the way that my mind works, I recognized that these stories that I tell myself directly affect my feelings, that directly affect my productivity, my manifestation.  So I’ve always been VERY careful to tell myself stories that are positive motivation.

RR:	Even when you were young?

WS:	By the time I was 7 or 8 years old, I was deeply in touch with my imagination as a powerful tool to help me feel good.  I could hide in my mind, really young.  I was a fearful child, so escaping into the stories and . . . television was big for me.  To go into the creation of a story in my mind was a huge, I guess safe haven.  I can paint delicious pictures in my mind and spend hours and hours in there without a necessity for anybody else to be involved with it.

(Time:  10:00 minutes)

RR:	Beautiful.  So cool.  Lucky.

WS:	It was definitely a magical blessing.  It was like there was almost nothing in the world that was . . . definitely nothing that I experienced at that time that was so bad that I couldn’t get away from it in my mind.

RR:	Beautiful.  And no one taught you this.  This was just something that you . . .

WS:	Yeah, it was really . . . it was very natural for me to spin tales as a child.  My mother loved it.  When I would make up stuff, one of the games I would play with my mother is I would make up stories and she would have to figure out which part of it was true and which part of it I was making up, and whether or not there was something she needed to do about it.  But it was always . . . the look on a person’s face when they’re riveted, and then when a punchline lands is like ecstasy for me.  

RR:	Tell me about how do you view success.  Like what do you see success as?  And has it changed from when you were young?

WS:	It’s definitely transformed.  I wanted to be No. 1.  I wanted to be the biggest actor on earth, manifest destiny.

RR:	Which you did.

WS:	The biggest, the best everything.

RR:	And you did all those things.  So you wanted that and you’ve manifested that.

WS:	I manifested that and the thing that happened is I thought with that would come love, protection, you know.  You realize, or I realized at least that you get to the top of all of that and you’re still the same, insecure little boy you were before you did all of that.  Now you just don’t have any distractions from it anymore.

RR:	And now, the version I’ve seen and experienced is, you can get hopeless because I spent all of my time and effort to solve the problem.

WS:	Yep.

RR:	And I did it, and it didn’t do anything.

WS:	Yes, absolutely.  

RR:	And now what do I do?

WS:	And it can it make it worse.  

RR:	Absolutely.  You can become hopeless because you’re thinking, I have the solution and you go for the solution and you spend your whole life to achieve the solution, and the solution is not the solution.

WS:	I got it exactly how I wanted it.  Beyond anything I could have possibly imagined.  Right?  It was perfect and beyond.  And still didn’t solve the problem.  There’s an existential terror that kicks in when you realize there’s actually nothing in the world to solve that problem.  So that is the introduction to the abyss.  

RR:	In some ways you can’t really get depressed until your dreams come true.

WS:	Yes!  Right.  (laughs)

RR:	When your dreams come true, you realize, hmm, now what?  

WS:	Yes.  Uh oh.  The two places I think you can get depressed.  One is rock bottom, when you hit rock bottom and literally you’re in the worst circumstance you could have ever possibly imagined.  You hear in AA they talk about rock bottom is when your life begins.  There’s a corresponding place that I call cliff top.  Right?

RR:	Where there’s nowhere to go but down.

WS:	Right, yeah.  It’s both ends of existence where there is nowhere to go but inward.  Right?  And it’s hard to explain and you can’t even truly have a conversation if someone hasn’t experienced one or the other.  

RR:	It’s completely unrelatable to everybody unless you’ve actually had that experience.  And that’s another thing, when you’re a kid and you have these dreams of being a success and you get them, who do you talk to?  No one teaches you how to act when you’re successful, how to be, what to worry about.  And your world changes and it’s really lonely.

(Time:  15 minutes)

WS:	I remember one time I was going something and I called Quincy Jones.  Quincy’s always my guy, giving me perspective throughout my life.  I was going through something and it was the top of the top, post Independence Day, Men in Black, Fresh Prince of Bel Air.  I was experiencing everything I’d ever dreamed and I called Quincy.  I don’t even remember what it was for, but I called him and I laid it all out.  He paused for a second and he said, man, what the fuck am I supposed to tell you?  He said I wouldn’t have made none of them decisions that you made . . .

RR:	That worked.

WS:	That worked!  Right.  He was like, you know, you’re on the dreaded island.

RR:	Yeah.

WS:	I’ll never forget that.  It called it The Dreaded Island.  It’s when there’s really . . . there’s no one that can help you and it’s the realization that you are the first time you’ve ever happened.

RR:	Yes.

WS:	And people can give you advice and people can make suggestions and you can look at other people’s stories, but the next moment and the next choice you’re going to make has never happened before and only you can choose it.  

RR:	It’s true.  I’ll tell you something, I think a crazy thought of mine is that everyone experiences THAT.  Because we are all singular beings and we all have the singular experience of the world, and all of the best advice we get are from people based on their experience of the world, not yours.

WS:	Absolutely.  Not yours.  Absolutely.

RR:	And we all have our own version.

WS:	Yep and I think that’s the part of the existential terror, right?  Is that the deepest reality that I’ve had to come to grips with is that I am alone . . . but I’m alone with everybody else.  (laughs)  We’re alone together.

RR:	And we’re all scared.  

WS:	And we’re all scared, right?  And it is having to reconcile reality is . . . it can be horrific.  It’s a lot easier to delude ourselves than it is to take a really cold hard look at reality.  One of the things for me was the . . . my father died in 2016.  That was the first time it ever dawned on me in my life that everybody’s gonna die.  It had never crossed my mind that everybody I know and everybody I love, everything I’ve created is moving towards disintegration.  That birth, life and death are inexorable.  It was like my father died and I just remember, I looked at Jada after the funeral and was like, oh shit.  She’s going to die.  (horrified long inhale)  And it was a painful realization.  It was a couple of months after that where everybody I looked at, I realized they were going to die.  

RR:	Yeah, and when you look in the mirror.

WS:	(laughing) And when I look in the mirror, that guy.  

RR:	Everyone.  It’s wild.

WS:	It’s a really wild thing, but after I settled into it.  I had a few months where it was just all I could think about with everybody, and then I came back to okay, that’s the case.  There’s no way around it, so now how do I want to live.  

RR:	Yeah, beautiful.

WS:	How do I want to interact with people with that truth.  There’s no way around it, you can’t escape it.  You can delude and not think about it and all of that, but one day you’re gonna get sucker punched.  So you can just wait for the sucker punch or you can begin to lean into the mystery and get torched a little bit in the process of trying to reconcile the mystery and to be able to be with life on life’s terms.  That’s been the last probably two years of my life in full consciousness of trying to look into the mystery and be okay with it.

(Time:  20 minutes)

RR:	Beautiful, beautiful.  And you know, nothing has changed.  This is another part of it.  Your perception of it changed.

WS:	Yes, absolutely.

RR:	But this was always the case anyway.

WS:	Yes, exactly.  (laughing)

RR:	You discovered it for yourself, but that’s just how it is.

WS:	That’s just how it is and how it’s always been.  It’s like can you be okay with it without deluding.  Without medicating.  Without escaping.  Can you stand firmly in the truth of what this place is and still be okay with it.  

RR:	You started by talking about laughing at it all, and that’s a really good way.

WS:	Laughing is fantastic.  There’s very, very few things above marveling at the humor and absurdity of life.  There’s very few things that match that.  Especially collective laughs.  If I would have to say there was a single thing that was my favorite aspect of human existence is collective laughs.  When a group of people burst into laughter at the experience of a singular joke, moment, experience.  That is right up there with sex.  (laughs)

RR:	It’s also contagious.  When you’re in a room full of people laughing, you’re more apt to laugh.  Other people laughing gives you permission to laugh.

WS:	Yes, exactly.

RR:	I remember the first time I went to a chanting . . . it’s called Kirtan, where people chant.

WS:	Oh yeah, I love Kirtan.  

RR:	The first time I went, the person who’s kind of leading the chant chants, and then everybody in the room answers . . .  chants back.  I was so self-conscious.  No one’s listening to me, everyone’s doing their own thing.  But the idea of singing in public felt so uncomfortable and embarrassing.  And then started doing it little by little, everybody was doing, and I’m doing it and doing it and doing it.  By the end of it, you’re completely high.  It’s a beautiful experience.  

WS:	Yes, it is a gorgeous churning of human energy towards joy and connectivity.  It’s like that ecstatic connection is . . . the top of what we can experience here.  

RR:	You had, tell me if the number is right, 12 No. 1 movies in the summer . . . 12 years in a row . . .

WS:	I had eight consecutive and then I had one No. 2 in there (laughs), so eight consecutive No. 1’s every year. 

RR:	Which is insane.  It’s a crazy number.

WS:	Yeah, that’s a hard one to beat.

RR:	Was it intentional?  And if so, tell me about like what went into the thought process to allow it to happen.

WS:	Yeah, I had decided that I wanted to be the biggest movie star in the world and in order to be the biggest movie star in the world, you had to make the biggest movies in the world and I guess the ‘science’ that I put to it was trying to figure out what made movies No.1.  So during that time I looked at the top 10 movies and 10/10 were special effects movies.  9/10 were special effects movies with creatures.  8/10 were special effects movies with creatures and a love story.  So Independence Day was a no-brainer.  Men in Black was a no-brainer.  I Robot, you know.  Star Wars was my favorite movie ever and Eddie Murphy was my favorite actor.  So I wanted to be Eddie Murphy in Star Wars.  That was the early formula that I was trying the create.  So movies like I Am Legend, even Men in Black.  It’s a love story, but it’s between me and Tommy Lee Jones.  It’s the same format of a buddy move.  Buddy movies function under the same structural components as a love story.  For me it was also special effects travel globally.  They don’t need the language, you don’t have to understand the language to be in awe of a creature and understand.

(Time: 25 minutes)

RR:	In each of these cases, did you find the project?  Were these projects all that were out there and you decided this is the one I’m picking?

WS:	I think you met . . . I’m sure you met my manager a couple times, J.L., James Lassiter.

RR:	I just saw him last week.

WS:	(laughs)  J.L. was the master of taste.  So I’d be working and J.L. would read everything.  He’s a really prolific reader.  He’d read ten scripts in a week and we had our template of what we were looking for.  He would take ten scripts and bring it down to three, and then I would read the three and we would make a decision from there.  His taste was leading in that early part of my career.

RR:	In terms of when you would pick a script, how much . . . and I imagine it would be different from project to project, but how much would your character change based on you playing the character as opposed to the generic version written in the script.

WS:	Usually . . . I’m trying to think . . . Pursuit of Happyness was probably the only movie in those early movies that was written for an African-American character.  I was always changing it from however it had been written with the writer hoping they were going to get Tom Cruise and ended up with me.

RR:	And it worked out.  It’s cool.

WS:	Yeah, it was always having to adjust to fit an African-American character, but for me, that was what I did from Fresh Prince of Bel Air.  Working in television, you’re changing everything like all day long, every day and you get used to looking at a scene, going to the side with two or three writers, making the adjustments and shooting it in 20 minutes.  I was wildly prepared to make the adjustments, to be able to make them quickly, and a part of my concept of going into these circumstances was to be able to do as much of everything that needed to be as possible.  I wanted to understand the cameras, I wanted to understand the marketing.  I wanted to understand everything involved to be able to capture myself in the best light possible without having to depend on other people.  So I was educating myself with the full process of filmmaking.  I had two or three of my friends that were writers and I brought people out from Philly to keep my voice in alignment with the right slang and all of that.  For those first probably four or five movies, I was bringing my own team to make the adjustments that needed to be made and to be able to make them on the fly was critical also.  

RR:	Would you also bring jokes?

WS:	Yes, oh absolutely.  Yeah that was . . . the flavor was what I was responsible for.  I would say there were two things that I was doing most in the early part of my career was the comedic flavor of the characters and the marketing.  I have a marketing mind.  When I start a project, I’m already imaging how I’m gonna sell it.  Those were my superpowers and then staffing my weaknesses around that.  

RR:	Cool.  Did you ever have any difficult times . . . have you come across the arrogance of some of the business people in Hollywood?

WS:	Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.  I would say the big arrogance that can be deadly in these circumstances is people thinking it’s the business of movies and not the movie business.  It’s secondarily a business.  

RR:	Yes.

WS:	You don’t have a business . . .

RR:	Without the art.

WS:	If you don’t have the art.

RR:	If the art’s not right, you got nothing.

WS:	Yes, and trying to get people to understand in movie making in general, that the vortex, the point where everything comes together, is between action and cut.  If you don’t get it between action and cut, you can’t have it.  Right?  That arrogance that people think other things are more important than the art . . . it’s like I’ve had to learn how to not make people feel disregarded.  Absolutely I understand how important the release date is, but can you understand that we literally don’t have time to make the art good.

(Time:  30 minutes)

RR:	Yes, and if it’s not good, you have nothing.

WS:	You have nothing.  

RR:	You have nothing.

WS:	You have nothing.  It’s such a strange mindset to see people over and over and over again, double down and triple down on nothing.  

RR:	Yes, and it’s because most businesses . . . let’s say it’s Nike.

WS:	Or you make Coca Cola.  You’re just repeating.

RR:	Let’s get another machine to make more Coca Cola so we can have it in the stores for Super Bowl Sunday.  They equate it to widgets.  It’s just another product and it’s not.

WS:	It’s not.  It really is a totally different thing.  I know it sucks for a lot of business minds because you actually can’t get ahold of it.  It’s a reason why it’s hard to get financing a lot for artistic projects because it’s not repeatable.  Right?  A movie is new every single time and everybody tries to put in systems and they try to follow formulas and all that . . and it’s not, man.  The most critical decision that will take something over the line or destroy it is in a magical moment that is captured in the creation of the art.  There’s things in the Pursuit of Happyness.  There’s a moment in Pursuit of Happyness where I’m in the bathroom and there’s just an overhead shot and there’s someone banging on the door and my son is laying on my lap in the bathroom.  And I stick my leg out and put my leg to hold the door.  It’s such a subtle moment, but for whatever reason it has a corresponding vibration in the human soul watching that, and parents . . .  you’re devastated.  But just that simple thing and you can’t plan that.

RR:	It’s the reality of the situation.  That point of so much of what’s good can’t be planned.

WS:	Right, can’t be planned you know.  It can be planned in a restaurant if you want . . . you can plan the meals and you can lay it out and you can have a recipe, and you have the seasoning and there’s a dish that is repeatable, but not in the process of creating art.  

RR:	I think that’s what makes the professionals or the people who are great at it, great, is the amount of times that it magically works.

WS:	Yes.

RR:	Because they don’t really control it either.

WS:	Exactly.

RR:	No one controls it.  

WS:	No one controls it.

RR:	It’s like the great jazz players.  It’s different every night.  Some nights are probably better than others, but the great jazz players . . . you’re probably not gonna be disappointed on any night.

WS:	Exactly.  You start to recognize that even your mistakes can be beautiful.  

RR:	Absolutely!  Absolutely.  The humanity breathes in the mistakes.

WS:	Exactly.  It’s when you have different goals for what you’re doing.  And that’s what’s happened to me as I’ve gotten older.  Wanting to be No. 1, right, as an ego process of gaining love and adoration and defense, and then transforming into a desire for self-investigation in the process.  Whether it’s No. 1 or No. 5 or No. 10, the process of self-investigation and self-expression is always No. 1.  You can’t be anything but No. 1 if you’re using it to understand yourself and understand life and understand humanity and connection, and understand love.  You’re using it as a process of growth and expansion versus using it as an ego defense mechanism.

RR:	Yes.  When you’re excited to share it with the world regardless . . .

WS:	Regardless, yep.

RR:	It’s successful when you say, okay, we can send it out there.  

WS:	Yep.  It’s already successful.  Absolutely.

RR:	It’s already successful.  It’s successful because what’s in it is successful.

(Time:  35 minutes)

WS:	Yep, absolutely.  At this point at my age I’m starting to realize that all the clichés are clichés because they’re true.  (laughs)  You hear people say ‘it’s in the process’ and ‘it’s not whether you win or lose, it’s how you play the game.’  It’s like oh shit, that’s true.  And how you play the game determines whether or not you experience the broadness of winning versus you’re shooting for a single point that may not be what the universe . . . it may not be the win that the universe is offering you.

RR:	And it’s not sustainable at all because it can’t be.

WS:	At all.  It can’t be.  

RR:	It can’t be.  Whereas continuing to do your best, bringing the most of yourself to everything you do, you can do that as long as you want to do it.  

WS:	Absolutely.  Yeah.  For the rest of your life and beyond.  Yeah.

RR:	For the viewer, they can see an honesty in that.

WS:	Absolutely.  At the core, everybody’s trying to figure out how to be here.  How to be here, how to not be miserable, how to not drown in your loneliness.  So everybody’s trying to figure out what are the rules to be okay.  

RR:	To be okay.

WS:	For me, there is nothing like creating a piece of art and the relationships that come from that, the questions that come from that, the self-exploration and the revelation that comes from that.  It’s like the art of manifesting gifts is like there’s the whole of what I’ve needed to learn about life has been in the process of trying to figure out how to make something that touches people’s hearts.

RR:	It’s great when it does that, when you’re making it and you have something that doesn’t really work, and then all of a sudden, something works.  You put your foot out and put it on the door.  You probably didn’t even think about it.  

WS:	Not at all, it just happened.  

RR:	You were just being natural and it creates these moments.  I’m starting to think also that the best things are a series of moments, maybe even bigger than the story.  If ten events happen in a row and every one of them is compelling and you want to see whatever the next event is going to be, even if it doesn’t make sense in the story, it could still be good.

WS:	Absolutely.  It could still be good.  Yes, absolutely.  Then a part of the expansion of what counts as successful for me in my life and in my experiences.  I’m not totally there, but I’m right on the edge of the full acceptance that there’s nothing but success.  There isn’t anything else.

RR:	If you show up, you’re successful.  You did it.  The work is to do it.  

WS:	It’s like the universe doesn’t offer you anything that you don’t need.  You might get offered a whole lotta shit you don’t want.  But there’s nothing that could possibly happen that doesn’t contain a gift that you need for your comprehension of how to be here joyfully.  Every single thing that happens is designed beautifully for you, your experience is perfect for whatever our shortcomings are, whatever our difficulties are, whatever intention we’ve put out, what comes back is a perfect curriculum for everything you’ve ever sought.  I’m not 100% there . . .

RR:	I don’t know if we ever get 100% there.  We just keep getting closer.  And having those revelations like when your dad passed and that experience, you’re just like oh, the world’s completely different than I understood it.

(Time:  40 minutes)

WS:	Absolutely.  Oh wow, okay.  Let’s throw all that stuff away from before 2016, we’re gonna throw all that away.  But yeah, just definitely coming into that space where I am even starting to get a little bit of a smile when it gets hard.  A little bit of okay, let’s dance Universe.  When things go wrong, when things are not pretty, when things are the total opposite of what I want, there’s a little bit of a giggle that starts to happen.  I’m trying to cultivate saying thank you out loud in the face of adversity.

RR:	Wow.  That’s beautiful.

WS:	Yeah, I’m not all the way there yet.  

RR:	It’s a beautiful practice.  I love the idea of that.

WS:	Yeah, adversity is a gift.

RR:	I wrote a section in the book where I talked about when something happens to you that . . . a tragedy happens, to put yourself in a state of removing yourself from the situation and looking at it like, wow, I didn’t expect that to happen to the hero in our movie.  What’s going to happen in the next scene.  How’s he going to get out of this.  

WS:	Absolutely, yeah.

RR:	If you look back over your life for every tragic event that happened, it always led to something either that you needed to learn, a better situation, something that you were clinging to that gets pulled out of your hands, leads you to be able to cling to the thing that you really wanted.  It happens over and over again.  We’re just too close to see it when it happens.

WS:	Too close to see it when it’s happening, yeah.  All you can think is oh my God, I don’t want this, I don’t want this, I don’t want this, but being able to settle into being able to look at those experiences, I was going to say minus the fear.  It’s not minus the fear, the fear can be there, but just not allowing it to make you run.  Pema Chodron calls it leaning into the sharp points.  That’s where I am now.  It’s like welcoming obliteration.  In comedy terms, we used to call it walking out on the comedic limb.  Right?  Where, Fresh Prince, we’d be in front of a live audience.  If you’re scared to fail, you’re not going to be able to try the big joke.  Like you gotta get out on the comedic limb, sometimes it breaks.  Sometimes you bomb.  But the ability, to mix metaphors, the ability to hit a home run is you gotta be willing to swing with everything you’ve got and you’ve gotta be willing to embarrassingly miss.  

RR:	You have to completely commit.

WS:	Completely commit, absolutely.  There’s a certain welcoming of obliteration.  There’s a certain seeking of ego annihilation that I’ve been experimenting with over the past couple of years.  It’s like I want my ego broken to realize that that’s not me.  

RR:	Yes.  The thing that I thought was going to kill me happened and I’m still here.

WS:	Yes.  Absolutely.  And I’m still here, and I’m stronger because of it.  That in the creative realm, I am really excited about what I’m going to create over the next few years in this new space of fearlessness.  

RR:	Beautiful.  Beautiful.

WS:	I’ve had perfect breaking.  I’ve been broken perfectly.  

RR:	On that note, let’s talk about the Oscars.  I want to say first, it’s maybe one of the craziest things I’ve ever seen on TV.  The experience of it was like holy shit.  It’s rare to get holy shit experiences on television, so it was one of those real like . . . and I like pro wrestling, so it felt like this was a familiar feeling to me . . .

WS:	A heel turn!

RR:	Yeah, it felt like a heel . . . whoa!  Heel turn on the Oscars.  I was not expecting this.  And we’re at a time where it feels like all the award shows in some ways feel completely obsolete.  So in a way, this was like, this made the Oscars relevant.  This event.  As wild as it was.  I want to ask about just . . . tell me about the day.  Tell me about the morning.  From when you were nominated for King Richard.  Start with the nomination.  The emotion that came up.

WS:	This is a part of my difficulty in talking about it because there’s multiple things that are happening, there are multiple things that are relevant.  There’s psychological complexity that I am dying to talk about.

(Time:  45 minutes)

RR:	Any that you can, or none of it that you can.  And you can say it in impersonal ways.

WS:	The central difficulty is I never want to make it sound like I think it’s okay, right?  So it’s why I’ve refrained from discussing what my experiences have been since then.  It’s so huge for so many people, right?  It was the death of the character.  It was the public death of the character that people have loved for so many years.  The experience that so many people have had around it is their hearts were broken.  There were people who were angry and there were people who felt deceived and all of that, but at the core of it, people’s hearts were broken.

RR:	I don’t care what anyone else thinks.  I only want to hear from you.

WS:	I’m trying to remain respectful to those people, knowing that this is going to go out.  

RR:	Of course, but you didn’t do this thinking about anyone else.  You were in the moment, in the same way you weren’t thinking about anyone else when you put your foot out to keep the door closed.  You were reacting in the moment.  But I want to understand, what was your internal state, was there anxiety.  First of all, did you think you were going to win the Oscar?

WS:	I was deeply and thoroughly exhausted.  I was coming out of Emancipation.

RR:	Hard.  Hard work.  

WS:	I’ve been getting the N word all day long for seven months by very good actors.  

RR:	Very real, convincing.

WS:	So I was not in the psychological space to even be out dealing and interacting with people.

RR:	In general, does the fantasy world of movie have to bleed into real life.  Just over the course of your life, does it happen.  If you do a heavy scene during the day, do you feel bad that night?

WS:	God, yes.  I had gotten physically sick from Emancipation.  We were having psychologist and psychiatrists on set, helping people.  It was a deeply traumatic experience.  I just wasn’t in any condition to even be out.  The combination of my book, I had just written my book and tore myself wide open.  It was a transformative, painful, difficult, emotional time in my life.  I’ve had this year and I’ve gone through it.  I want to be able to talk about it intelligently and I’m not totally comfortable yet because I can’t explain what it’s like to confront your shadow.  For your shadow to burst out and demand to be heard and seen, and reconciled.  The trauma and wounding of my childhood, and for it to happen in that moment and this last year has been the individual greatest, most powerful, most transformative time in my life.  The difficulty and the pain that I’ve suffered and things that I’ve lost, and the things that I’ve gained was God’s perfection.

RR:	Yes, yes.

WS:	Like completely and totally absolutely what I needed to heal and to become the authentically joyful and authentically loving and authentically powerful version of myself.  

(Time:  50 minutes)

RR:	Yes.  You had to kill the theater mask version of yourself and it got real.

WS:	Yes, it got real and I would say one of the most powerful ideas is to recognize I’m a sage and I’m a savage.  Right?  I’m Jesus and I’m Judas.  Right?  And I worked so hard to only show the positive side of myself that the volcano erupted within me.  I am both of those things.  And I have to be okay with that, trying to reconcile that I’m not as good and shiny as I would hope the world to see me.  I’m not that.

RR:	You’re a human being.  You’re a human being.  And there’s really good and there’s bad for everybody, even like the gurus that we put on pedestals.  Then there’s some story that comes about them and you can’t believe it.  It doesn’t take away from the teachings.  It’s like their intentions are good and they’re human beings and they act like human beings sometimes.  Sometimes humans do dumb stuff, all of us.  

WS:	And what I realized is that all of these years, I’ve been . . . I wanted other people to think I was great.  I wanted other people to think I was nice.  I wanted other people to think I was special.  I wanted other people to think I was . . . you know, funny and wonderful.  And what I had to confront was that I didn’t think that about myself.  

RR:	And that part of yourself that you were pushing down . . . 

WS:	Pushing down into the dungeon . . . was a legitimate, authentic part of myself that I had to confront and I had to reconcile and I had to accept.  I have never loved myself more than this moment right now that I’m sitting here with you and the suffering is a part of the salvation, and it is like that reconciling, that I’m human was excruciating.

RR:	Beautiful.  But it’s real.  And real feels good.  

WS:	When you get there.  (laughing)

RR:	It actually feels good to know, yeah, and again, still here.  It’s okay.

WS:	It doesn’t kill you.  You can suffer the disintegration of your life, you can suffer the disintegration of your fabricated self, you can suffer the disintegration of all of those fantasies.

RR:	Did you always know that the fabricated self was fabricated, or did you ever buy into it?

WS:	No, I found out that night when everybody else found it.  (laughs)

RR:	No, that’s fascinating.  It’s fascinating how that works, isn’t it?  

WS:	(laughing) Yeah, yeah.

RR:	It’s amazing, it’s amazing.

WS:	It really is . . . as I’ve said, I’ve been trying to . . . I want to be able to talk about it and share, and I haven’t totally processed it.  

RR:	Still figuring it out.  I understand.

WS:	I’m still figuring it out how to  . . . I understand it within me, but how to talk about it is still . . . it’ll be the central aspect of this next phase of my artistry and career and life.  That process of accepting your humanity and it doesn’t make you smaller.  It makes you bigger.  

RR:	Absolutely.

WS:	I’m not smaller.

RR:	No.

WS:	I’m bigger than I’ve ever been.  And I’m about to be bigger than I’ve ever been.  I’m going to be authentically loving, I’m going to be more creative than I’ve ever been.  And at the same time, I’m a lion.  

(Time:  55 minutes)

RR:	Yeah, you’re embracing all of your self.

WS:	Yeah, I’m a lion and that’s okay.  

RR:	Absolutely.

WS:	It’s like a part of that energy is what helped me work 18 and 19 hours a day and all of that.  I’m no longer rejecting the part of myself that doesn’t like when people talk shit about me.  I don’t like it.  

RR:	Let’s talk about that day before.  Forget the event and talk about the reality of the situation regardless of that because it’s a heavy event.  It’s the third time you’ve been nominated for an Academy Award?

WS:	Yep, third time.  Pursuit of Happyness, Ali.  

RR:	You did not get the first two.

WS:	Nope.

RR:	And now it’s the third time you’re up, you’re in the room.  What’s the feeling of the day.  What’s the general feeling of . . .

WS:	Pure exhaustion.  

RR:	Tired from work?

WS:	Yeah, tired . . . it was pure exhaustion.  

RR:	Do you remember anything about arriving?  Do you remember walking in?

WS:	No, that thing was a big blur.

RR:	I remember it looked different on TV.  Was it in a different room?

WS:	Yeah, yeah, it was a different room.

RR:	Usually it’s in like a big theater and this time it looked more like a TV set or something.

WS:	I don’t know if it was the same theater and they changed the seats.  I’m pretty sure it was the same theater, but just different . . .

RR:	It looked very different.  It looked different on TV.  It looked much more contained.  It felt more like a TV show than a live theater event, which is what it usually feels like.  But feeling the room?  What do you remember?

WS:	Umm.  I think I’m finished talking about it for today.  

RR:	All good.  You did great.  

WS:	Yeah, thank you.  That’s as far into that as I have ventured publicly.  

RR:	You did great.

WS:	Thank you, man.

RR:	And I appreciate you opening.  I think it’s good for the world.  

WS:	And I recognize that being able to talk about it will be a part of my future and a part of my ministry.  So thank you for the opportunity.  That’s as far into it as I have gone.

RR:	My pleasure, and I would recommend that anything you can do to let the information out for yourself, do it because it will feel good.  And, if you’re thinking about the messaging of it, it won’t be as good.  

WS:	Yeah, exactly.  The authenticity and the honesty.  Absolutely.

RR:	Feel where it’s coming from, let it all out and then you can decide how much is on the cutting room floor, and that’s up to you.  But the reality is letting it out is going to feel good.  The more you do, the better it will feel.  Tell me a little bit about acting.  About going from . . . how is the actor in King Richard different than the actor in Fresh Prince.

WS:	I would say for every human, writing your story down is critical.  The process for me of writing my book, going through my childhood, talking to my brothers and sister, talking to my mother’s sisters, I think coming to the consciousness of how you define yourself is critical.  It’s kind of subconscious until you say out loud.

RR:	You didn’t know you knew it.  It was there.

WS:	Right.  You’re living it.  You’re suffering the consequences of your story without actually saying it out loud, writing it down, so you can hear how you’re defining yourself.  A big part of writing my book was the realization that it actually is stories.  It’s not experiences.  Its stories about experiences that you tell yourself.  And when you actually look at it, 90% of the stories you tell about yourself won’t stand up to scrutiny.  Your brothers and sisters will say, well hold on a second, no, that’s not what Mom said, that’s not right.  And you go through these things and I remember what I did as I wrote my book, then I had two weeks.  I called everybody that I mentioned in the book and had them come so we could do a retreat and I read everybody every word that I said about them, and let people respond.  

(Time:  60 minutes)

RR:	Beautiful.  I hope you filmed that.

WS:	Yeah.  

RR:	Oh good!  

WS:	Yeah, we did.  It was the first time my mother and I . . . my father was abusive, and it was the first time my mother and I had talked about it.  I described my mother in the book as defiant.  She looked and she was like, what did I do that made you think I was defiant?  And I said, well, Daddy would hit you and you would just stand there and look at him.  She said I wasn’t being defiant, she said I knew that my kids could hear so I didn’t want you to hear me scream.  I didn’t want you to think he was hurting me.  And I was like (dramatic gasp), that’s wild.

RR:	That’s wild.

WS:	Right?  So in my mind, the character of my mother was defiant.  Right?  But my . . .

RR:	She was protecting.

WS:	She’s like defiant?  She was trying to protect her children.  You go through your life with these stories and I was shocked by how much of my stories were fabricated at best.  

RR:	Yeah, reinterpretation to make it okay.

WS:	Reinterpretation to make it okay.  

RR:	That’s how we do it.  

WS:	Yes.

RR:	That’s how we do it.  We see the world, something happens.  We immediately make up a quick story to explain, oh, that’s why that happened, but we don’t know.  And forever more, we’re living with this story.

WS:	No idea.  And we’re not seeing people for who they are.  They become characters is our stories that we demand they fit our interpretation more than well, let me just let it go and sit and be with the person.  Let them tell me who they are versus me casting them in a certain way in my narrative.  So that was a long back to the King Richard question.  I guess you’d say I discovered my inner landscape during writing my book, and I realized it was a malleable landscape, that it wasn’t solid.  What I thought of as my life and my story and me was actually not solid at all, it was made up, not unlike the character I play in a movie.  Where you take all of these character traits and you put them on to your consciousness and you walk around for a couple of months as that character.  It’s like my character was no different than that.  You pick up these things and you choose to be a certain way for certain reasons that may or may not have any bearing on what’s true and authentic for you deep down at the core.  So writing my book, I discovered my inner landscape and what it did is it deepened my acting ability to be able to deliver an idea.  I understood more about humanity and psychology by understanding myself and then . . . what actors call a toolbox . . . it’s like my toolbox got so deep and rich, and the types of subtle human emotions that I can deliver on camera now is beyond anything I’ve ever experienced.  

RR:	So beautiful.  So beautiful that you got to find all of it out and then apply it to something where we all get to enjoy it.  

WS:	Absolutely.  Emancipation was really the first thing that I moved into after King Richard, and just my comprehension of human psychology and emotion is so rich.  Then what happens is you play a character, someone like Peter in Emancipation.  That level of experience and that suffering, and every time you interact with an individual’s life in that way, it’s like a new brushstroke on your soul.  It’s like playing a character with that kind of depth actually adds to your humanity and your personality and your comprehension and your ability to connect to a human, and to find harmony.  What I realized coming out of Emancipation, sometimes you watch those types of movies, you experience those types of things, you can come out with anger.  You can come out with hatred.  But I found a whole other place in playing Peter where the most vicious, vile, hateful human, I can now see into the suffering of that being, and I’ve never been able to do that before.  I can sit across from anybody now and recognize the most vile, the most horrific perceptions and attitudes.  I can see it as suffering.  

(Time:  1 hour, 5 minutes)

RR:	And we don’t know other people’s experiences.  We don’t know.

WS:	Exactly.

RR:	We don’t know how they see . . . most people are doing their best.  I think everybody is doing the best they can.  

WS:	I think that’s the nature of the human mind.  You can’t help but do the best that you can do.  Your mind can be damaged and your best can be shit, but I think that we are innately programmed to do the best that we can do.  That was a part of my healing and my relationship with my father.  When I realized he was always doing his best.  He was working 18 hours a day to feed his kids and alcohol was how he was able to cope, and that just led to other difficulties, but he was always doing his best.  He was always reaching for love.  He got into a difficult downward spiral.

RR:	Was Ali the first character you played who was a real human being?  As opposed to a written . . .

WS:	Ali was before Pursuit.  Yeah, so Ali was the first time that I played, and it was a living human that was going to sit and watch.

RR:	And someone we all grew up with.

WS:	The most recognized human on earth at the time.  The most photographed human.

RR:	How different is it preparing for a role when it’s someone that people know and have expectations of versus a guy in a movie?

WS:	There’s different benefits and difficulties.  So the benefit is that you can ask the person.  So you don’t have to guess about the psychological movements.  You can talk to the person, you can talk to their families, all of that.  It’s an actual person, there’s books written on him.  There’s less that you have to create as an actor.  Whereas if you’re playing another character, you have to make up their backstory and you have to make up their life experiences.  So that part of the work is done when you’re playing an actual person.  The difficulty in that, though, is someone like Ali; people know exactly what his voice sounds like.  I play Peter in Emancipation.  Nobody knows anything.

RR:	There’s no image.

WS:	Yeah, no image.  I get to make it up, but with Ali it’s like, you don’t want to get caught doing a caricature which Ali, you know, because of the sound of his voice and the brashness and size of his personality, you can definitely get caught doing a caricature.  Those first couple of moments of the film, can you give them something that transports them into your version, into your interpretation.  And the fact that Ali was going to watch it, I didn’t realize that when I took it.  I found myself sitting in a theater behind Muhammad Ali, I was like, oh no, this was an awful decision.

RR:	How cool was Ali, by the way?

WS:	He was fantastic, man.  I remember midway through shooting, his family had asked me, they were like just get him to move, get him to come to the gym, so it was my job.  So I’m trying to get him to come to the gym and we moved around.  So I walked in one day and he was sitting down and I tapped his stomach.  I said, hey, Champ what’s going on, what you doing with that?  And he said, “Oh this, man?  This ain’t nothing but a young girls playground.”  (laughter)

(Time:  1 hour, 10 minutes)

RR:	So funny.  

WS:	He was . . . the brightness of his personality and his joy for life was the thing that I wanted most to be able to capture and it was  . . . as an actor you’re looking for that central core that you can relate to.  That playfulness and that joy . . .

RR:	He was funny.  He was so funny.

WS:	That joy of people was the central idea that I connected to to build out my interpretation.

RR:	Was the physical transformation difficult?

WS:	Oh that was excruciating.  That was excruciating.

RR:	How long did it take?  

WS:	From the time I agreed to do it until we finished shooting was a year and a half.  So I did other movies in between, but I was training for a year before we started and then six months up to and through the completion of principle photography.  So it was a year of three days a week and then six months of six days a week.  

RR:	And hard.

WS:	And hard.  I got up to 223 pounds and at the time I was walking around probably at 198, 199, to put on that kind of weight over the year and a half period.  

RR:	How did it feel in life, that transformation, forgetting the character for a moment, being Will Smith and having this extra muscle.  What does it feel like?

WS:	It was the first time I felt strong.  I had gotten to a one rep max bench press in a 365 during Ali.

RR:	Wow!  Wow.  Serious?

WS:	I was like in terms of my emotional transformation, it was the first time in my life that I felt I could defend myself.  I had always felt fearful.  I was a fearful child.  I was always fearful and I had played characters that were arrogant and strong and Mike Lowrey, I was playing those guys, but working on Ali and training with professional fighters was the first time that I actually realized I could defend myself.  It felt good to walk through an airport and not be scared.

RR:	Also, I think when you add . . . when you’re physically strong, you also get a mental strength that’s different and it feels good.  You can see things better.  

WS:	Absolutely.  There is a certain calmness and certainty, and other people feel it too.  And the world begins to move in different ways when you feel strong within yourself.  Physical strength is absolutely the first step to mental and emotional endurance and power.

RR:	I think it’s also closer to our natural state.  Like as animals . . . like if you weren’t strong enough to take care of yourself in the wild . . . you can survive.

WS:	You gotta feel like you can survive.

RR:	So now, the way our lives are so temperature controlled, where we don’t have that same strength that feels good to have.  

WS:	Absolutely.  That’s one of the things also that I am trying to manage as I’m getting older.  I’m 54 now, so I used to be able to go to the gym for 8 weeks and be in shape for a movie.  Now it’s 12 or 16 weeks, and I have to be careful with injuries.  There’s a certain shift that has to be lifestyle now.  I used to be able to get away with 6 months one way, 6 months the other way.

RR:	I bet it’s gonna feel good though.  It’s gonna be better.

WS:	Absolutely, for sure.  

RR:	Well thank you so much for doing this.

WS:	This is good, man, it feels great.  

