[00:00:07.900] - Speaker 1
Tétragrammaton. I've been listening to your voice for so long, so often, and I had no idea what image put to it.

[00:00:30.620] - Speaker 2
I'm happy to see a friendly visage.

[00:00:34.710] - Speaker 1
It's funny, actually. One previous time, I did a video call with a producer who'd been listening to the podcast and wanted to do a TV series based on it. And he said, The third thing he said was, I I realized you had a Rick Rubin beard. Did anything become of that project? Well, it's on the back burner while other things happen, so no.

[00:00:55.450] - Speaker 2
Cool. Oh, good to know because I feel like it's a smart idea, and I that it happens. Yeah. How many years into the series are you now?

[00:01:05.190] - Speaker 1
It's coming up to five years. It's about four years and eight months, something like that. I started in October 2018, actually on my 40th birthday. The original plan was it would finish on my 50th birthday doing one a week, but then the episodes got bigger and so that's not happening.

[00:01:22.580] - Speaker 2
From its inception, you viewed it as a 10-year project?

[00:01:27.350] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Well, it's 500 songs. The original plan was to do an episode a week, but then as the episodes have got longer and as I've had various live things in the way, I started this pre-COVID and the entirety of the last few years. The original plan was to do an episode a week, get it done in 10 years, but as it is, it's going to end up taking more like 20, I think.

[00:01:50.570] - Speaker 2
It's a real benefit to society and musical history, this project, and it's a beautiful way to take in the information. I'm learning so much from it, so it's very enjoyable.

[00:02:04.000] - Speaker 1
Thank you. Thanks. Very good of you to say. The intention was always to do something worthwhile. I have this idea in my head of it being my equivalent to those big omnium gathering books that academics in the 18th through early 20th century would write, On the Origin of the Species or Das Kapital or Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, those things, where they just do this massive, massive big project that them a decade and covers everything. In my ego, that's what I'm thinking of it as. But basically, I want it to be something that is helpful to the world. That sounds like a massively egotistical, a massively big-headed thing to say, but it is meant to be of use to people.

[00:02:56.390] - Speaker 2
I think it really is. The difference between those two that you refer to is because of the way that it's being delivered on a weekly, semi weekly basis in digestible chunks. It's almost like we have our hands held through the process and It's much more digestible than the 3,000-page book.

[00:03:20.790] - Speaker 1
Yeah, although some of the recent episodes have been almost indigestible by themselves for so long.

[00:03:26.810] - Speaker 2
I want to ask about that because the earlier episode seem to be shorter and the episodes seem to be getting longer and longer, and to my ears, only better, because it seems like there's much more information in them now, whereas before now, I might go back and listen to an early episode and I feel like, Oh, he's barely starting the story and it ends.

[00:03:45.520] - Speaker 1
Yeah. My original intention was to keep everything to be about half an hour per episode, mostly because I'm ADHD. I don't have a great attention span myself. A bit like the old average Hitchcock thing, the length of a film should be proportional to the endurance of the human bladder. I don't want people to be bored by what I'm doing. I don't want to go into huge, massive, long, long episodes, but I've had to recently. The reason for that is the stuff I started with, there's basically little or no information out there about any of these people. There's one book about Sister Rosetta Tharp. There's one book about the Inkspots. There are no books at all about Jessie Belvin. There was one book about Vince Taylor, but in French. If you put together a half hour podcast on those people, that is often covering all the information that exists on those people. Like, literally, the Jessie Belvin episode, that's like half an hour. Jessie's, Belvin's, niece posted in the comments of that episode that she had been waiting 60 years for somebody to do her uncle justice like that because that was all the information that exists on that man.

[00:04:56.930] - Speaker 1
Whereas when you cover, say, the Beatles, there were so many books on just the Beatles out there that you could literally spend your entire life reading them and still not have all the information. The thing is, when you're covering somebody like that, you have to tell multiple stories. You have to cover the information that you would have to cover if somebody had never actually heard of the Beatles, because the whole point of this is for it to be a history and to guide people through things. I found early on that there are people out there who haven't heard of even the major big act. When I did the Hank Williams episode, there were people and your musicians and you who had never heard of Hank Williams. You have to cover all the basic stuff that you would expect everybody knows. You also have to cover all the stuff that the people who know everything about that band expect to have in. Then you have to put in something that is interesting and new for those people so they're not going to get bored by just hearing the same thing over again. Then you often have to tell something different, which is what you're actually the point of the episode itself.

[00:05:57.260] - Speaker 1
You have to fit in all these things. And there is a much greater audience expectation also for the later episodes. I did an episode on Jefferson Airplane that was 90 minutes long, and half of it was complaints that I hadn't covered one medium-sized hit by Jefferson Starship in the mid '70s in the episode. With there being that much more information out there and that many more people knowing parts of that information, you have to cover more. Now, that's going to change again as we get further on, because at the moment, I'm in the most oversignified part of rock history. I'm currently doing episodes set in 1968 and '67 through about '72, that so-called classic rock era. Every single band has 20 to 50 books written about them and tons of journalism from that era and documentaries made about them and biopics and all this stuff. By the late '70s, the information has fragmented a lot more, so people have fewer expectations. But this period, the rolling stone 500 greatest albums of all time period I'm in at the moment. There's so much information that needs to be encapsulated to do the job properly that sometimes you end up with a three-hour episode, and that's just the way it is.

[00:07:11.320] - Speaker 2
I noticed at the beginning of the, whatever I remember started in '68, I can't remember which episode it was, you talked about how the themes in the warning at the beginning of the episode, you said the themes now for the next 30 episodes or so are going to get darker, more to be upset about. It's interesting that that warning comes right at what we consider maybe the greatest golden era of music.

[00:07:40.260] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[00:07:41.020] - Speaker 2
That connection is interesting.

[00:07:42.200] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Well, the thing is, one of the reasons we consider it the greatest golden era of music is you've got all these people who were mythologised. Part of the reason they were mythologised is because a lot of them died very young. A lot of them were doing a lot of drugs. There were a lot of things. In the next 30 episodes or whatever, I've got I've heard the mansion murders, I've got to cover Altamont. There are some big, horrible things that happened, but they tie in so intimately to this story. I think part of the reason that that era is so mythologised is because of the tragedy the other company did it. Because if Jimi Hendrix or Brian Jones or whoever had lived to be 80, they would have made some terrible records. They would have done some things that destroyed their reputation. You only have to compare the reputations of Brian Jones with Eric Clapton. You look at the way people talk about Clapton now, and it's all, he's a racist, tired old man, he should shut up and go away. People would be saying that about Hendrix. They would be saying that about Brian Jones.

[00:08:44.290] - Speaker 1
They'd be saying It's probably not racist in Hendrix's case, but you know what I mean. Maybe.

[00:08:48.300] - Speaker 2
We can't say.

[00:08:49.900] - Speaker 1
The fact that a lot of these people died young aided in their becoming mythological, aided in them not doing a terrible Christmas album in the mid '80s or whatever. I think that ties together a lot as well. Although one of the other things I try and show in the series is that while there are peaks and troughs in music history, there is always good music being made. There was good music being made in 1960, which is a year that's generally considered dreadful. If you pick up the highlights from any era, you're going to find some great stuff there.

[00:09:25.210] - Speaker 2
One of the things I love about the episodes is that they give a backstory that may not be obvious. Example, I learned a tremendous amount about the geography of the United Kingdom from the Animals episode. I didn't know any of that. It plays into the story, and it's fantastic because I'm getting to learn all interesting things about different aspects, completely unexpected. How do you decide which thread to pull? Because there are so many different angles you can come into these stories from. Do you choose which ones you're going to use, and are there some that you discard, even though there may be potential good stories?

[00:10:07.860] - Speaker 1
Oh, absolutely, yes. I tend to plot out, not an exhaustive detail, but every what was originally a one-year chunk, every 50 episodes, which I also package, lightly rewrite the scripts and put them out as books on their 50 episode books. And I try and create a narrative arc over those 50 episodes with a beginning and an end, and I plot that out as a chunk. I always knew that I was going to start covering Vietnam with the last Train to Clarksville episode, for example. There are always three or four options as to how I can tell a story. There are always one song that can be substituted in for another. Often I'll get some pushback from listeners because they don't see the bigger picture. I had some complaints about covering I Fought the Law at all, the Bobby Fuller 4 track, because people were saying, That's only a minor thing, the Bobby Fuller I weren't important. But I was laying down stuff that plays out along the next 20 episodes in that about the influence of the Mafia on the recording industry, about the growth of the LA music scene, about the influence of Hollywood in the LA music scene and so on.

[00:11:18.660] - Speaker 1
The Bobby Fuller 4 story, as well as being an interesting story in its own right, and the precursor to all the early deaths we see coming up later, is a way I can get all that information in one episode. So yes, I'm planning out always… I know exactly where the series is going to end on episode 500. I know a few milestones I've got to hit to get there, and I plan out a narrative arc over the 50 episodes chunks.

[00:11:45.710] - Speaker 2
At the beginning of each 50, do you decide on all 50 or how many? So you decide 50 songs at a time, typically, to get to 500, 10 sets of 50.

[00:11:56.530] - Speaker 1
Yes. When I started doing this right at the beginning, I made a list of 200 songs that I knew needed to be on there no matter what. I first made a list of the ones that I needed to tell the story. Then I looked at things like the Rolling Stone list of 500 greatest singles, the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame list, those things. Not to copy those lists. The majority of those aren't in there. But to understand that I know why I'm not covering stuff that I'm not covering and to understand that... To make sure I haven't missed anything obvious. You don't want to get to 1970 and have somebody say, Hang on, you didn't do an episode on the Rolling Stones? So I put together a list of about 200 songs that I knew needed to be in there. Then at the 50 episode mark, the 100 episode mark, the 150 episode mark, I've then plotted out the next 50 episodes as a group with the beginning and end and little resonances to make the 50 episode arc tie together. Like episode 51 was the episode on the Million Dollar Quartet Yet. Episode 100 was the first episode on the Beatles, the FAB 4, so it's foursomes at either end.

[00:13:06.380] - Speaker 1
Episode 101 was on Telstar. Episode 150 was on All You Need is Love, which was a satellite broadcast. Creating these little things where if you go back 50 episodes, you think, Oh, yes, he was laying a track to this. I will put together the 50 episode list just before I start writing the script for episode 50 or 100 or 150 or whichever. I know where I'm going. Now, I will occasionally change that, but it's usually only a matter of shuffling around a tiny bit as I realize that the chronology of the story I'm telling works better if I cover this episode before that one or that little detail But it's generally a very fixed 50-episode list. Then while I'm doing those 50 episodes, I'm making notes for the next 50. I'm noting, Okay, like I said in the last episode on the Temptations, that I'm going to finish their story. I know that at some point after episode 200, I have to do a final Temptations episode, which will probably be, Papa was a Rolling Stone, and that thing.

[00:14:09.370] - Speaker 2
You mentioned the feedback that you get. How much does the feedback that you get impact the future episodes?Not.

[00:14:18.230] - Speaker 1
At all.Great..

[00:14:19.320] - Speaker 2
Good news.

[00:14:20.120] - Speaker 1
It can affect, to an extent, how much information I put in a story. But I know that there are episodes I am going to be doing that people will hate. I mean, I won't say what it is now because I have a policy of not saying what episodes come when. But I will say that episode 184, I expect the audience to go utterly mad about that one, like Furious wanting to kill me mad, that I have covered that song at all. So I'll say that now. The only thing it does is, like I say, it has made me make some of the episodes longer because I've realized that people have an expectation for more information on certain bands, or because I realize that people don't have the information that I assume was general background knowledge for everybody, so I have to put that in. But it hasn't affected the story I'm telling you. It hasn't affected the songs I'm choosing. It hasn't affected the artist I'm choosing one Iota. What it sometimes does is I fund the podcast by having a Patreon and people support that. I created a bonus episode, which they started as being 10 minutes.

[00:15:27.120] - Speaker 1
They're now often more like half an hour. If I get a sense that a lot of people are expecting an episode on some band that is just not going to turn up, I will do a Patreon bonus episode on that band. They're shorter, they take less time, they take less effort, and they're not part of the main narrative, but they're often quite interesting. I will have people ask me, Why haven't you done an episode on Frankie Valley? It'll be like, Yeah, Frankie Valley is not part of this story, but I can do a bonus episode on Frankie Valley, that thing. But as far as the effect on the main narrative that you get, if you just listen to the main podcast or buy the books based on the podcast, no feedback has affected what I'm doing there at all, and it won't.

[00:16:13.270] - Speaker 2
Great. That's very good news. How much of the information in the podcast did you know before starting the project?

[00:16:20.980] - Speaker 1
Much of it, but nowhere near all. I wouldn't have started the project if I wasn't fairly sure of my knowledge. I'm autistic and I'm also hyperlexic music, which means I read a lot and I have special interests, and I learned to read very, very young. So literally from the age of seven, I was reading biographies of Bill Haley. I was reading books on the history of popular music. And so I have a lot of this information in me. But at the same time, there are artists that I am an expert on. There are artists where I know their greatest hits, and there are a handful of artists where I know that person made that record that's important, don't really know anything else about that need to learn that. Even for the people who I'm expert on, I need to sometimes figure out the connections between them and other artists. Those can sometimes be surprising. To take the episode on All You Need is Loved by the Beatles, which covers the Bigger Than Jesus thing, I didn't realize until I did deep dive into the Beatles in '66, '67, that the teen magazine that published the Bigger Than Jesus quote was edited by Danny Field, who went on to be...

[00:17:36.480] - Speaker 1
The Ramones did a song about it. We worked with Iggy Pop. He was best friends with Jim Morris and all these things. I hadn't realized that that connection there until I did a very deep dive on the Beatles in '66, even though I read 100 books on the Beatles by that point already. So I tend to, as a rule of thumb, I tend to read about four books per episode on top of the knowledge I already have and take take notes of those. And again, it varies from episode to episode. Some episodes, like the second Monkeys one, I could basically write an autopilot without having to check anything out at all. Whereas the Grateful Dead one I just did, I had to read, I think, something like five books to get that one done. It just depends on the length of the episode and on the... Because sometimes you will know that you'll have to do a lot of digging to find a little detail that you know is there. I know this must connect to that. I know it. You can feel the patterns in the history, if you like. Then you have to go digging and digging and digging until you find what the actual connection is.

[00:18:39.010] - Speaker 1
That thing, I often don't know in advance. But as far as Johnny has produced Big Mama Thornton and John Hammond discovered Bob Dylan, those stories, I know all that stuff better than I know much about my sibling's life.

[00:18:57.360] - Speaker 2
The most recent, the Grateful Dead episode, is the first episode that thus far I found impenetrable. I've listened to maybe the first seven or 10 minutes, and was so disconnected from what was being said that I don't even know my way in. I have to give it more time because I know that eventually that'll change. But I just want to share that first, for whatever reason, it's like a world that it's difficult to access.

[00:19:25.870] - Speaker 1
It is a very difficult and accessible episode. It was a It was a difficult and accessible episode for me to write. There are reasons that become clear as you listen to it, why it's so difficult. I expected that episode to get an entirely negative reaction from everybody. I had a negative reaction to it while I was writing it. It was a difficult episode. It's not an enjoyable episode for me in any way. But the overwhelming feedback seems to have been that by the time you get to the end, it works for people, which I'm honestly surprised by. It's a very experimental episode I would not be surprised at all if people hadn't liked it. I would not be surprised if you find it an unlistenable one. I found it an almost unwritable one. The episodes going forward will not be like that. That one is very much a special case for reasons that get explained in the course of the episode. But yes, it's a departure, and that's not the new normal for the story.

[00:20:23.200] - Speaker 2
I love the idea that in the context of a series, that there can be aberrations and that a story can be told in a different way Even if it's difficult or challenging in a new way, I think it adds to the overall gravitas of the work.

[00:20:38.180] - Speaker 1
Yeah, there are experiments in storytelling in the podcast. The majority of it, as you know, is fairly meat and potatoes. But I do do things like the episode on, say, Good Vibrations, where that starts off with talking about the Greek myth of Orpheus and then goes into talking about the invention of the Theramon and those things. I have to make this interesting for myself as well as for the listeners. You have to stretch and you have to grow and you have to try different things. Sometimes those different things don't work. Now, happily, with the Grateful Dead episode, most people seem to think it has worked, and they actually seem to think it worked far better than I do. I don't have to distance from it myself. I just look at it and see this six-week period it took me where I was working 10 hours a day, every day for six weeks to get that thing done, and it felt like it was never going to be ended. I couldn't physically keep doing that as a regular thing. I'd literally die. But there will be other occasions further down the line where I try other kinds of narrative experimentation, where I try other things.

[00:21:43.820] - Speaker 1
I might do a super compressed episode where it's only 10 minutes long, but it tries to tell the entire story in that time. But the bulk of it will always still be these half hour to two and a half hour long, fairly straightforward narratives, because it's It's good that the Beatles white album has Revolution number 9 on it, but if Revolution number 9 had been the only thing the Beatles had ever put out, they wouldn't have been. You have to have I want to hold your hand as well.

[00:22:11.290] - Speaker 2
You mentioned that the second Monkeys episode you could have written in your sleep What's your connection to the Monkeys?

[00:22:17.580] - Speaker 1
I was in Monkeys Fandom, which sounds like a strange thing to say, but one of the things I'm trying to do in the podcast is talk about how a lot of bands that the critical I've been on the consensus on has been fairly negative were actually very good. I happen to like the Monkeys a lot. I wrote a book about the Monkeys in about 2011, and I've been connected to Monkeys Fandom quite a bit. I'd read all the books on the band. Luckily for me, in that respect, the Monkeys don't have a vast literature behind them, like the Beatles or Dylan or something like that. There's maybe 15 books in total on them. I'd read all already. I had the entire narrative already there in my head, and I could just go, done. I'd pull out a book to check a date, but that's about it with that one.

[00:23:11.060] - Speaker 2
Tell me about your monkey book. I love the monkeys, by the way.

[00:23:14.250] - Speaker 1
All right, cool. Most of the best people do. My monkey book is called Monkey Music, and it's just a song by song analysis discographical thing of the entire monkey's catalog. It's not like the thing I do with 500 songs. I feel I feel a bit awkward about recommending anything I wrote before the start of 500 songs, to be honest, because I think my own writing has got so much better since then that I'm semi-ashamed about anything I did before that. But it's a track by track guide to the entire recorded output of The Monkeys, all the outtakes, all the live recordings, all things like the Dolans Jones voice and Heart album from the '70s or the soundtrack album of the point that Mickey Dolans and Davy Jones did in the '70s. Those Those things are all discussed in there. There are very few books out there that treat The Monkey's music as music as opposed to a cultural phenomenon that could be written off. I saw the need to do one. I did it myself That meant that I had all the narrative material already in my head from that.

[00:24:20.550] - Speaker 2
It feels like also your ability to deliver the message in the podcast has gotten better and better. If you listen to the early episodes, they tend to be read hour, the new ones feel like you're talking to us, and it feels confident and very clear dissemination of information.

[00:24:39.030] - Speaker 1
I'm glad you think so. The reason for the slowness in the early episodes is me overcompensating. I'm aware that my accent is not always the most comprehensible to Americans. Also, I'm a very, very fast thinker. I'm still speaking now much more slowly than I think. If I was talking normally, I talk like this, and this is how I'll be talking, you wouldn't be able I don't understand a word I'm saying. When I started, it was, I'm going to read it very slowly and very clearly so everybody can understand every word. As I've got more used to what the audience can accept from me, as I've got more used to how the audience react to my accent, I can do this thing that I'm doing now, which is halfway between my normal, very strongly accented gabble and the podcast voice that was doing at the beginning. But also, you can't keep this up if you're talking for three and a half hours. If nothing else, it would make the episode seven hours. I've got more attuned to what my listeners can cope with. Also, I think my listeners have got more attuned to my voice as well.

[00:25:46.410] - Speaker 1
But I'm very aware that I've spent a lot of time in the US and people have great difficulty understanding a Northern English accent in the States. It was my effort to accommodate them. I'm still doing a little, but nowhere near as much. I also think I have become more comfortable doing it because you get positive feedback, you get people saying nice things. Oh, maybe I'm actually okay at this.

[00:26:11.800] - Speaker 2
It's fantastic. I'm very happy you're doing it.

[00:26:14.810] - Speaker 1
Thank you.

[00:26:15.910] - Speaker 2
The Monkeys are viewed in the mainstream as in somewhat of a negative way, as you mentioned, or other. When interestingly, the band on their records were often the The Wrecking Crew, the same people who played on The Birds, the same people who played on Simon & Garfunkel.

[00:26:35.860] - Speaker 1
That's actually one of the myths about them. The Wrecking Crew did play on some Monkeys' records, mostly actually album tracks produced by Mike Nesmith. The early Monkeys' singles The band on that was actually a band called the Candy Store Profits, which was Boyson Hart's band that they played with. One of the things I'm trying to debunk in the background is this belief that the Wrecking Crew were the be-all and end-all of '60s session musicians. Because one of the things we found in looking at music history is that you have these periods of overcorrection. There was a period where for a long time the Wrecking Crew weren't credited for anything at all. Then there's become this period where the recing crew accredited for every single record that came out in the States in the '60s. Partly that's because Carole K, the bass player on a lot of those records, is her recollection does not always match the recollection of anybody else or the documentation, put it that way. She will say that they played on Simon & Garfunkel records like I Am A Rock or Homeward Bound or Sounds of Silence. But then you look at the actual documentation, and a lot of these were recorded in New York by New York players, not by the Wrecking Crew.

[00:27:46.710] - Speaker 1
But yeah, it's definitely true that a lot of bands were using session musicians. One record that the Wrecking Crew did play on, Freak Out by the Mothers of Invention. That's a Wrecking Crew recording with some extra guitar by Zapper, and I think Rory Strader and Jimmy Carl Black are on there as well. But the vast majority of the instrumentation on that is the Wrecking Crew. But you would never, ever get people saying, Frank Zapper was a manufactured team pop I think. It's just absurd. The Monkeys did, of course, end up playing on a lot of their own recordings. Everything after the first... Well, not everything after the first two albums, but the third and fourth album, the instrumentation is primarily the Monkeys on that. But also there was this idea that the only valid way to make music is to create a self-contained band that does everything, which the But all sorts of assumptions baked into that. All sorts of assumptions, some of them very classist and racist and sexist and so on. Because if you look at the vast majority of black artists in history haven't been self-contained bands. The vast majority of women artists in history haven't ever been self-contained bands.

[00:29:00.960] - Speaker 1
They've been people who've used these other ways. The idea that if you hire a guitar player to play on your track, that that makes the track invalid. It's nonsensical. It makes sense if you then lay claim to the guitar player's part, but that isn't what was happening.

[00:29:17.150] - Speaker 2
It almost seems like the opposite is true, is that the standard was for Session's players to play on records, and the exceptions were the Beatles. Even then, George Martin was playing along Yeah.

[00:29:31.060] - Speaker 1
The Beatles had George Martin, they had a lot of orchestra players. They had Andy White playing drums on the first record. Now, it is true that most British bands of the time largely played their own instruments. Often, with the exception of drums, you would often have Bobby Graham or somebody going into the studio to replace a drummer, which is why George Martin thought that was perfectly okay to do for the Beatles' first single. But the American bands, yeah, pretty much every record that came out in the States up to about '67-ish. The Beach Boys, we were using Session Musicians, though, again, also that's one of those things where the myth has grown to the point where it says they never played on their records. They played on most of their records early on, but they soon got in session musicians to cover for them. The Birds, first couple of records, lots of session players on those. Obviously, you've got all the vocal groups, your Simon & Garfin calls, your Mommas & Poppers, those people, but who had one acoustic guitar player in the band. They weren't playing all those instruments, obviously. There were always self-contained bands.

[00:30:37.420] - Speaker 1
But weirdly, some of the self-contained bands who did play on their own records, the association, they get thought of as a manufactured pop band. Their entire first album, they played everything on it themselves. But because it's this sweet, orchestrated pop thing, the assumption is just that they were a manufactured group. I am not going to sit there and say that Motal records and Stax records were somehow artistically inferior to some mediocre jam band from San Francisco, just because the mediocre jam band knew how to play the guitar and the temptations didn't. It's an ahistorical perspective that's been put back on a lot of these things to the detriment of understanding the music.

[00:31:22.240] - Speaker 2
I think in the day, I don't think there was any expectation that the artist played anything.

[00:31:27.810] - Speaker 1
None. If you read the a photography of Howard Calin from The Turtles. He talks about how the fact that the turtles played on their own records was because the record company were cheap skates and wouldn't pay for the session musicians. That was the way it was thought of. Playing on your own records was a sign that your record label weren't interested in funding you. The thing that needs to be remembered is that the method of production was so different back then. You would go into a studio for one four-hour session. You would be expected to cut four complete tracks in that time. Now, your average rock band musician is not Earl Palmer, is not Hal Blaine, is not Carol Kay, is not Tommy Tedesco. They will take a couple of dozen takes to get a part down, not because they couldn't play it on stage, but just because they are not inhumanly perfect. You have to be inhumanly perfect to do an entire take as no layering, no multitracking, everybody playing at once. A take that was perfect. You have to do four of them in a four-hour session. You are going to hire professionals who can do the job.

[00:32:32.890] - Speaker 1
That's just common sense. It's not a matter of them not being able to do it. It's a matter of we've got half an hour left to cut this track in. You can't do 20 takes in that time. That's a reality that pretty much ended by the late '60s, and you get into these things where people are spending six months to a year to five years to make an album. Then, yes, you can try stuff in the studio, you can learn the parts in the studio, you can make your mistakes. You notice that the Beatles start stretching out as the '60s go on spending more and more time in the studio. That's because the first couple of albums, they're playing the live set. They're playing stuff that they had played live a million times. You can go in and record 10 tracks in 10 hours, bam, bam, bam, bam, That's why they existed. Once that pressure was off, yes, people stopped having professional session players play everything, but that isn't an artistic thing. That's a financial thing as much as anything else.

[00:33:40.980] - Speaker 2
It's also a very particular skill set. Playing in the studio is different than playing for a general audience. Just a different-Of course. It's a different animal. With studio time being so scarce, especially at that period of time, these artists would have maybe several hours in a year to ever be in a recording studio studio and to expect them to be able to deliver the way someone who spends their entire life in a recording studio recording. It's just a different... It's a different animal.

[00:34:09.040] - Speaker 1
Absolutely. It's a totally different thing. This thing is what I hope to get across by doing a chronological history of the music, a very close to chronological history, is to show how these things develop, to show how these things change, to show how the assumptions change, the technologies change, and as a result, what was normal in the studio changed. As a result, the sound of records changed. As a result, the expectations of records changed. You don't really get the rock band as a thing until 1967. As a cultural phenomenon, there are bands that we would now consider rock bands before that, but there was no default idea of a rock band. Now, if you think rock band, you think one or two guitars, bass drums, mostly white men, electric stars, maybe keyboards, maybe not. But 1964, that time, well, there would be a rock and roll band or a pop band or rhythm and blues band because it wouldn't be called rock bands until a bit later. But they might have a saxophone player. They might even have a whole horn section because the whole idea of rock as a thing in itself hadn't properly congealed yet.

[00:35:24.400] - Speaker 1
There were many other options happening and many other possibilities happening. Those possibilities steadily closed closed off as the years and decades went on. Now people project back and they assume that the Rolling Stones in 1963 were trying to do the same thing that the Rolling Stones in 2023 are doing. That there was a clear career path there. When they were playing on the Ill pie Island, they were thinking, In 30 years time, we're going to be playing Wembley Stadium. There's a whole other world in terms of what people were doing, what people were trying to do, what people were thinking about then that gets lost when you project these things back on people.

[00:36:11.630] - Speaker 2
Do you think the reason for the archetype rock band in our imagination, and anything varying from that is wrong, is because the Beatles are the Beatles? If it weren't for the Beatles, would we have that same vision?

[00:36:27.750] - Speaker 1
We wouldn't because I'm only getting into this in the podcast at the moment, but most of the ideas we have about the rock band now basically come from ideas that were promoted by Rolling Stone magazine in the late '60s. They had very, very clear ideas about what was cool and what wasn't and what was good music and what wasn't. I frankly disagree with a lot of their ideas. But what they were doing was promoting very heavily people who had switched from folk music rock music after hearing the Beatles and had followed the Beatles lineup pretty much exactly. It had gone for two guitar-based drums. Before the Beatles hit America, the only bands that were two guitar-based drums band, basically, were surf bands, not not just the Beach Boys, but the safaris and Dictails and the Deltones and all those things. The rest of the American music industry was much more varied and much wider. In Britain, there were more two guitar-based drum bands because the Shadows were so big, Free Beatles, and people copied that model. But still you had your Manfred bands, people who could switch between Hammond organ and flute. You had lots of Hammond players, actually, lots and lots of bands with Saxon Hammond organ.

[00:37:47.780] - Speaker 1
They also died out in the late '60s when the American bands then start feeding back over to Britain. But the Beatles is a crucial thing where they define what is cool in the eyes of Rolling Stone magazine and the people who copied the Beatles in the States. That's where you get this very fixed idea of a rock band from.

[00:38:10.450] - Speaker 2
Let's look at the conversation between the United States and Britain music, what led to what and back and forth. From as early as you can think of.

[00:38:22.990] - Speaker 1
Well, the conversation between the Britain and the States was rather one-sided for a long time because of a mutual band that came in the 1930s between the two countries' musicians unions, which meant that, for example, when Ray Noble, the British band leader from the '30s, went over to the States, he had to hire an entire band of American musicians. It was just Ray Noble, the conductor, and Al Boli, the singer who were allowed over. Actually, the Glen Miller Orchestra, Glen Miller was Ray Noble's band leader in America, and his group built up from that, basically. But for a long time, this meant that you couldn't have bands and musicians moving back and forth between the two countries.

[00:39:08.080] - Speaker 2
Was that both directions?

[00:39:10.420] - Speaker 1
Both directions, yeah.

[00:39:11.940] - Speaker 2
If Glenn Miller and his orchestra wanted to play in the UK, he could not.

[00:39:16.590] - Speaker 1
No, they couldn't. There was a total ban on American musicians playing in Britain or British musicians playing in America. This lasted until the late '50s, at which point you have people like Lonie Donovan had a hit in the States, he was allowed to go over to America. The band was strictly for musicians, so it didn't affect singers. It's like Johnny Ray could come over to Britain and perform, but he couldn't bring any musicians with him. When Lonnie Donegan went over to the States to perform, he did a few TV shows and stuff, he had to be backed by the Johnny Burnet view. He wasn't allowed to play his guitar. He was only allowed to sing. But this meant that the cultural transmission was basically one way, America influencing Britain and not the all the way around because you had Hollywood films coming over here and people would hear music in those. You had also the armed forces network radio in Western Europe. You had a lot of American service bases in Britain and also in Germany, so you could hear German radio from Britain. So people would hear American radio a lot, but Americans wouldn't hear British music.

[00:40:23.560] - Speaker 1
And so the influence was all very much one way. But it was a dilute influence and an influence without the proper cultural context, which meant that the British people were picking up a lot of weird ideas about what American music actually was. There's a line that I often quote, which I think was Charles Shal Murray said it first, if I'm wrong. It was somebody said it, but I quote the line often. When Bo did these things, I'm a man, he means, I'm a man, so don't call me boy, honky. When the Yardbird sing, I'm a man, they mean, I'm a grown man now, mummy, so you can't make me tied in my room. British people were taking these American things without the context of the culture from which they came and building a new culture in their imagination from it. Early on in Britain, much of the early British rock and roll was awful, just really, really bad. And weirdly, a lot of early British rock and roll was attempts at copying Bill Haley and the Comets, or even Bill Haley and the Comet imitators like Freddie Bell and the Bell Boys, rather than copying Elvis or people like that.

[00:41:28.030] - Speaker 1
In the late '50s, though, you start to get the first little bits of two-way transmission because the Musicians Unions, I think it was 1956, it might have been a year or two later, but they came up with a one-in-one out system where an American musician could play Britain if a British musician was allowed to go over and play America. The musician had to be somebody who played the same instrument. Louis Armstrong could come over and play Britain, but there was some random trumpet player from Devon who got to go and tour America. Otherwise, is Louis Armstrong would be putting this trumpet player out of business, which, of course, is a nonsense. He's Louis Armstrong. Trumpet players are not fungible, but that was the ruling. Then you start getting people like Buddy Holly and Eddie Cochrane and so on coming over here. And what tends to happen is it tends to be the American artists who are slightly past their prime in the States still have some glamor in Britain as an American rock and roll hero. So Jean Vincent, one hit wonder in the US, Bebop or Lula, then nothing else. Two years later, he's coming to Britain and he's headlining and he's a massive star and he brings Eddie Cochrane over, who, again, in the States was not a big star at the time.

[00:42:40.820] - Speaker 1
And just this phenomenon over here. They end up performing over here a lot. Those particular performers tend to shape what British rock and roll becomes. You have a lot more influence of people like Eddie Cochrane and Jean Vincent and of the American Blues musicians that Chris Barber got to bring over, people Muddy Waters, Sister Rosetta Thorpe, Otis Span. They have an outsize influence in Britain because they're the ones that you can go and see. Elvis isn't touring Britain because Elvis can make... Well, also because the colonel would be arrested for murder if he had left America. But Elvis on Touring Britain because he could make enough money in America. But Jean Vincent was touring Britain. So Jean Vincent becomes this big, massive thing over here because you can go and see him, but he's a proper American rock and roller. And then very slowly Very, very slowly, you start getting British records being released in America. But they tend to be weird things like Telstar by the Tornado's or like Lonnie Norgan records. Yeah. And they're not part of a big thing. You do occasionally get Americans covering British records. Del Shannon covered the Beatles before the Beatles had a hit in the States.

[00:43:55.980] - Speaker 1
Because people of that era are always on the look out for a big hit song from somewhere. But it tends to be cover versions rather than the records themselves. It's only really when the Beatles hit America that the influence becomes two-way in early '64. That's also the time when there becomes far more interconnection between the two countries because suddenly a lot of American promoters desperately want a lot of British musicians, which means that a lot of American musicians have to be able to play in Britain. You get a lot more travel back and forth between the two countries, a lot more musicians from one country playing the other as a result of that. Eventually in the mid '70s, the Musicians Union thing, they just say, Fine, whatever, you can play wherever. But that restriction, and then the slight loosening of that restriction is what leads to the feedback becoming in two way rather than one way.

[00:44:47.420] - Speaker 2
What were the biggest American influences on Britain and then the other way from your perspective?

[00:44:53.310] - Speaker 1
The biggest American influences on Britain. Early on, the big, big influences were Bill Haley and the Comet, Also, Buddy Holly was huge over here compared to how he was in the States. Eddie Cochrane was. Obviously, then people like Elvis and Little Richard were obviously big influences, even though neither of them tour Britain. Elvis never and Little Richard, not until after he'd stopped having hits. But also the British folk music scene led to things like the Skifle movement, which then led to the Beat groups. The folk music scene was very influenced by the early acoustic recordings of Muddy Waters and Lonnie Johnson and a lot of these people who were pretty much unknown at the time in the States. And British rock music developed independently in different places. The Liverpool scene was very, very different from the London scene. And the London scene was mostly influenced by 1920s Dixieland Jazz and then by Muddy Waters, which Muddy Waters has obviously now become one of the bedrocks of rock music. But that's retrospective. At the time, he wasn't a rock music person, and they were listening mostly to his acoustic things. People like Lead Belly, Big Bill Bruonsy, those people were very influential very early on.

[00:46:07.380] - Speaker 1
Cliff Richard, Britain's first big rock and roll star. He was promoted as Britain's Elvis, but he was more like Britain's Ricky Nelson, actually, in vocal style and in the sound of his records. He was very influenced by Ricky Nelson, actually. But he was also covering My Babe by Willy Dixon on his first album, which is not a thing you would have got from an American performer at that time. This is in 1957. I think it may be the first ever cover of that song. It's being done by Cliff Richard, the most white-read person ever. The closest American equivalent to Cliff Richard in the popular imaginary now would probably be Pat Boon. Imagine Pat Boon doing the Little Walter record. It's that disconnect. In America, there was really no influence at all from any British musicians. The one thing that did happen, weirdly, is the Johnny Otis song, William the Handgive, which was a big hit in the '50s. That happened because one of Johnny Otis's previous records had been a massive hit in Britain. The Three Tons of Joy, his vocal group, had toured Britain, and they'd seen people doing hand-jives, which was a British And they actually recorded William the Handgide for the British market in the hope that that would become another hit over here.

[00:47:20.980] - Speaker 1
And it wasn't, but it was a massive hit in the States. But there was really tiny little British influences. Like Johnny Cash's version of Rock Allen Line is very clearly copied from Lonnie Donegan's version of Rock Allen Line rather than from Lead Belly's. You can tell because he gets the train line wrong. He says that the Rock Allen Line goes down to New Orleans, which it doesn't. But Lonnie Donegan had misheard Muline on the Lead Belly record as New Orleans. And Johnny Cash was copying Lonnie Donegan. But it's these tiny little influences. But as far as I can tell, free 1964, there is no real major impact from British music on American music at all. It's all... A Apart from also, both Bob Dylan and Paul Simon came over to Britain and, again, were very involved in Britain's folk scene in 1962, '63. So you have people like Martin Carthy teaching Paul Simon's Scarborough Fair, those things. And indeed, a lot of Dylan and Paul Simon's early work is very, very, very, very heavily influenced by the British folk music tradition. But even that was... The British folk scene was very influenced by people like Rambling Jack Elliott Peggy Seeger, who were Americans who came over here.

[00:48:32.850] - Speaker 1
At best, there's a two-way influence between Britain and America, but most of the time, it's a one-way America influencing Britain and not the other way around thing until 1964. And then finally, it starts meshing You start getting, obviously, the Beatles and the Stones, and then a bit later, the Who and the Kinks and all those bands becoming big in the States, too.

[00:48:53.200] - Speaker 2
It seems like even the folk movement in the US was inspired by music from Ireland. There seems to be a circle there.

[00:49:03.800] - Speaker 1
Yeah. That's more, though, not so much Irish, contemporary Irish musicians. It's more those songs had already come to America. A lot of Appalachian folk music is stuff where it was originally from Ireland or actually from Scotland and Northern England as well. Not so much from the Southern parts of England, but a lot of Northern English folk music, a lot of Scottish folk music, a lot of Irish folk music became Appalachian folk Asian folk music, but not so much a direct thing. There were obviously the odd example like the Clancy Brothers, for example, who were Irish musicians who moved to Greenwich Village. But for the most part, they were playing music that was inspired by Irish music four or five generations back, often with the place names changed. So places in Ireland would become places in Kentucky or wherever.

[00:49:53.300] - Speaker 2
A couple of the things that you mentioned, I just want to share from the American perspective, it's a different perception One is the idea of the Jean Vincents of the world viewed as one hit wonders here, being accepted in England because they were there. From the American people who take music seriously, we've always assumed that there's a cultural love of music in the UK that's different than in the US, which feels more disposable. And culture in general, not just music, but music as well. Same for all of the great jazz artists who end up spending more time in France than in the US. It's not because they're any less good. They're not disposable. They just happen to be accepted there because there's a culture more welcoming to that material.

[00:50:46.110] - Speaker 1
I don't know that it's necessarily a more welcoming culture, although it is in some respect. A big part of it is that Britain certainly is a much more geographically compact place than the States. Britain is roughly the size of New Jersey or somewhere, but has 65 million people in it. So this means if you have 5,000 people in Britain who really, really like Big Bill Boonsey, that's enough to do a small tour where you can play four or five things in five days. You have 20,000 people in the US who like Big Bill Boonsey spread over 50 plus times the area. It's not financially viable to tour around. You've got your one Big Bill Boonsey fan there and then 200 miles away the next one. Whereas in Britain, particularly in Britain's major cities, you would have enough people to fill a decent-sized venue in most of Britain's major cities for these people. I'm currently doing an episode on Cream, and one of the things that's talked about there is there was a package tour of American Blues musicians, and they only played one venue, originally, which was the Free Trade Hall in Manchester. 200 people from London traveled up to Manchester for that show.

[00:51:56.540] - Speaker 1
Now, Manchester is like Britain's second or third biggest city compared to London. This is like somebody from New York traveling to Chicago in terms of American cities. Traveling from New York to Chicago to see a gig is not a decision you make lightly. Traveling from London to Manchester to see a gig, it's a bit difficult. You have to figure out some accommodation, but it's a couple of hundred miles, you can do it. It means that subcultures in Britain, pre-Internet, pre-widespread communication, it was much easier for a subculture in Britain to build to a decent different size and to be able to sustain itself and to be able to sustain musicians coming over. Whereas that's been the case occasionally in America with... Other time, we're talking about the '60s and so on. In each major American city, you would have a subculture. But there would not be any connection between the LA subculture and the New York subculture. There would be very little travel between them just because of the sheer distances involved. Whereas you read all the time Eric Burden travels from New Castle to London to sit in with John Mayole thing going on.

[00:53:06.360] - Speaker 1
There's much more opportunity for personal connections to build up subcultures there. I think that free internet, free easy communication, it was much easier to have an underground in Britain, a sustainable one. I don't know so much about France and the jazz musicians. Also, the other thing, of course, is that, not to say that there is no racism in Britain because they're very, very, very much is. But the racism is of a different flavor in Britain, and it's not so immediately obvious. Certainly, there was no legal segregation at the time in Britain. So American black musicians, in particular, coming over here would feel significantly less discriminated against a lot of the time than they were in the States. So it would feel like a more welcoming place for that reason. Now, of course, there is all sorts of different racism, but it wasn't the racism they were expecting. It would feel like a more welcoming place in that way as well, which is why so many Black American musicians became so big over here as well, specifically, far more so than the White ones, where there are Jean Vincent and Eddie Cochrane's and so on became big over here.

[00:54:16.540] - Speaker 1
But in general, most of the people that Britain took to its heart that weren't really huge in the States were black.

[00:54:26.300] - Speaker 2
Do you know much about the inspiration of Neapolitan melodies? Like songs like Volare. There are so many-Oh, that stuff. There are these Italian songs that ended up getting rewritten in the US with English lyrics. But they're all these beautiful Italian melodies.

[00:54:48.680] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I actually haven't looked into that stuff very much. There's obviously, like you said, there's Velarie, there's things like It's Now or Never, the Elvis track, which was originally O Solomia, all that stuff. A lot of the reason for that seems to have been copyright stuff. A lot of these things were songs where the melody was in the public domain or where the people thought the melody was in the public domain and they didn't look too closely. They'd slap a new set of lyrics on it and copyright it. People like Hugo and Luigi, the producers who did The Lion Sleeps Tonight, did all that thing. Obviously, I haven't looked into this stuff in as much detail because it only tangentially connects to rock music. But of course, so many of the great crooners of the '50s and early '60s, Frank Sinatra, Jean-Dine Martens, and so on, were of Italian ancestry. That Italian culture is there very, very strongly. But it's not something I've looked into all that deeply, so I wouldn't want to say too much about it. But yes, there was a thing for that, particularly around 1963, right before the Beatles hit America.

[00:55:54.870] - Speaker 1
That was very, very big in the general pop Audience, yes.

[00:56:01.470] - Speaker 2
Have you read Bob Dylan's new book?

[00:56:04.160] - Speaker 1
I started it. I don't have that much time to get to any reading that isn't very, very directly concerned with what I'm doing next. I started reading it. It's fascinating to me. Dylan is somebody who clearly has a huge appreciation of particularly late '50s, early '60s popular song. Do you know his most recent album, the one from last year, the year before? It's absolutely packed with references to the songs of his youth. He'll just be throwing out things about pink pedal pushes and red Cadillac in a black mustache and all these lines from Sun Records going in there. In a way, he used to do with the Bible. He's now doing rockabilly 's songs'. It's fascinating stuff, actually, one of his strongest albums in decades. The book seems to be very much along those lines. The fact that the front cover is Eddie Cough from Little Richard and Alice, Lesley, the female Elvis Presley on the Australian where Little Richard decided to give up music. That's not a photo that gets picked at random. Obviously, he didn't do the cover design, but I can guarantee that he had input into that. Like I said, I've not finished reading the book yet, but it's always fascinating to read a songwriter talking about songwriting, and particularly one who isn't just hitting the obvious notes.

[00:57:26.740] - Speaker 1
He's not just talking about the people that everybody else talks about. I look forward to finishing the book and having a proper opinion on it, but it's definitely interesting me.

[00:57:38.430] - Speaker 2
The reason I bring it up is the person who told me about your podcast about a year ago, I learned about your podcast. The person who told me about it said, This is Bob Dylan's favorite podcast. I don't know if you've ever heard that before. No, I had not heard that. Like all things Dylan, have no idea if it's true or not.

[00:57:57.230] - Speaker 1
I had not heard that. If it is, then I just hope he hasn't been insulted by anything I've said about him. This is one of the things that bothers me, actually. I have recently, in the last year or so, started hearing from musicians who A lot of musicians who listen to the podcast. Nobody as big as Dylan yet, but I've heard from plenty of people who are possibly going to turn up in the story at some point or who are tangential to the story or that thing. But if I the wrong thing and this person decides. That's flabbergasting, if true. I had not heard that, so I don't know where your friend got that from. I wouldn't know if it's true or not. What I would say is having listened to his Theme Time radio show and having read part of that book and so on, it wouldn't surprise me if he had listened at least to the early episodes. It wouldn't surprise me. I'm fishing in the same pool as him certainly in those early '60s and early '60s episodes. Maybe he did listen to it. He's given up by now. Who knows?

[00:59:05.610] - Speaker 2
The reason I ask is because maybe your podcast influenced that book. We don't know.

[00:59:10.570] - Speaker 1
If so, I would be very proud.

[00:59:13.200] - Speaker 2
Tell me about, are there any influences on the podcast? What motivated you to start? What are the threads that led to this?

[00:59:21.360] - Speaker 1
There are a few. The first thing goes back more than 20 years. I did a music history course at university And I remember in one of the very early lessons, the lecturer's playing a Carl Perkins track and then saying, Don't worry, we don't expect you to actually listen to this stuff and enjoy it. You just have to know it exists. And I was like, Well, I listen to Carl Perkins and enjoy it. And I was, What music history course is it if you are not giving people the tools to appreciate this? And so in the back of my mind, ever since then, 20 odd years, was this thought, maybe I could do something that would teach people how to appreciate, give people the context so they could listen to Carl Perkins and appreciate it, so they could listen to Jessie Belvin or whoever. Because a lot of this music, certainly the music I cover in the early years, is from a very, very different culture It's easy to see why somebody would just dismiss it. But it's so rewarding. I want to give people the context where they could appreciate it properly from that. Then I wrote a few books over the years, mostly while still working a day job.

[01:00:28.950] - Speaker 1
I did one called California Dreaming, which is a mini, mini version of what I do with this big podcast. It covers the LA music scene from 1960 through to 1970, and it covers all the different threads. You have the Beach Boys and Phil Specter and Love and the Turtles. It's much, much, much, much, much smaller scale than what I'm doing now. But it showed me that that thing can work. I originally planned to do a book series along the lines of my California Dreaming Book, A History of Rock Music in 500 Songs. It was going to be a much, much smaller scale thing that I'm doing now. It was still going to cover 500 songs, but it was going to be like a thousand words on each one, 10, 50,000-word books. The shortest podcast episodes I've done have been like 3,000 words. The most recent one was more like 30,000. But that was my original plan. I was going to do the same thing. But then I lost some freelance work I was doing, so I had more time available to than I thought it was going to. So I thought, might as well do something big.

[01:01:34.350] - Speaker 1
But then also, I heard a podcast called Cucane and Rhinstones, which I don't like to make too much of a connection of it because a lot of people lump me in with that on social media and tag the bloke who does Cucane and Rindstones in. And I get the impression that he's rather sick of it. I'm some tribute actor or something. But Cucane and Rindstones is a country music podcast. What I got from that is he I told stories the same way I tell stories using the same narrative tricks I had used in other non-music writing. I'd written books, the books of TV criticism and comics criticism and stuff. I'd done this interweaving narrative odd things in that which I hadn't really done in my music books until then. And hearing Cucane and Rindstone showed me, firstly, that you can do that writing that I've been doing in other media about music. And secondly, that the podcast format really works for this because you can exert the music, you can do all that stuff. And so that made me think, okay, the idea I had for the series of books, if I do it as podcasts, then it'll work better.

[01:02:38.940] - Speaker 1
And my original thought was, as much as anything else, that the podcast would be promotional material for a series I had books. I was still thinking in my head, books, and I have put out books of the podcasting. But it turned out that the podcast became the big thing and it has become surprisingly popular. But I expected it to have a few listeners. But it has become surprisingly extremely popular, and I couldn't be more pleased about that because I genuinely think I'm doing excellent work. Not to sound big-eared, not to sound arrogant, but I think I do what I do well. The potential for what it can do only revealed itself to me over the first few episodes, and then I got all into it far more so. Even in the very earliest episodes, I'm doing the interlinking things. Basically, the entire first six episodes are all about the Carnegie Hall concert of the 1938, of 1938, and everything that comes from that. But I think you can hear very early on, I start to think, Hang on, there is potential here for something really special, and it takes off. But yeah, the initial things are the University popular music history course and then Cacane and Rhinstones.

[01:03:51.570] - Speaker 2
I love that in the doors episode, recent episode. I don't think the doors even form as a band until 40 minutes into the episode. It's I've done a lot of that stuff because a lot of the time, I did that with the doors one, I did that with the velvet on the grand one, I did a similar thing with the birds episode on 8 Miles High.

[01:04:10.690] - Speaker 1
Somebody like the doors, there is this image of them in the popular consciousness. And that image is a very two-dimensional thing which misses out so much of why they became who they were, where it was they did, and so on. And the more interesting story is to see how these things grow from influences jazz, from influences, from transcendental meditation, from all these things, and how all that plays into the story. You can do the, Oh, yeah, Rayman Zareck was walking down the beach and he met his old friend, Jim Morriston. Jim said, I've got some songs for you. And you can start the story there, and it's an okay story. But if you start the story with the formation of Pacific jazz records in the early '50s, then it's suddenly-Much more interesting. Yeah, to me, at least.

[01:04:55.400] - Speaker 2
Me as well. The 8 Miles High episode is incredible. I I sent it to many musician friends who send me back. This is so inspiring. Seeing the roots, Ornette Coleman and really John Coltrane and then Ravi Shankar, and how that played into Getting to 8 Miles High. In some ways, that's an interesting one because it doesn't really seem to talk about the song at all. It's talking more about the influence of jazz and psychedelic Indian music to create this new sound.

[01:05:31.350] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Of course, sometimes that's the case. A lot of the early episodes, it's very much song-focused, and there are still occasional very song-focused episodes. But with 8 Miles High, obviously, that hangs on that song because the comes from cold Trains in India and that thing. But 8 Miles High is a point in a line. It's not the whole thing itself. That's one of the big things that the whole series is. All of these songs are important, but they're not important in isolation. They're important because of how they connect one thing to another thing. They're important because of their place in a much, much bigger network, a network of influence and of back and forth across generations and across continents and so on. It's not just about the individual song, the individual record. It's not just about the individual genius composer. There are genius composers, there are genius performers, but those geniuses come from somewhere and they influence other people. A genius who sits alone in this room and it never interacts with anybody else might as well not exist. It's all about showing how... One of the things I say a lot, particularly in the early episodes, is there's no first anything.

[01:06:46.150] - Speaker 1
You can always trace a bit of music back to something earlier, but then also you can always move forward from there. The thing where I talk about how the intro from Johnny B. Good traces back to 1912 Although that might be slightly wrong with the date there because this was a few years ago. I did that episode, not everything is front of brain. But I think something like 8 Miles High' is more impressive in a way when you realize that it's not just come from nothing, that it's part of this big tradition and you can see how it's come from Coltrane being influenced by Ravi Shankar. I think that makes it more impressive that they're bringing these things into the folk rock idiom in their case.

[01:07:26.350] - Speaker 2
Where does your personal musical taste lie?

[01:07:29.960] - Speaker 1
I like about 80% of what I've covered in the podcast so far. I try not to talk too much about my personal musical tastes, purely because what I try to do with the podcast is make every single episode seem like the best case for that record and that artist. If I say, I don't like artist X, but I do like artist Y, then people listening to it will listen knowing that I don't like this band in the first place. So they'll look for negatives about the band in the episode. I try to keep my personal taste a little bit distanced from the podcast, if you like. But at the same time, it is a fact I've written Books on the Beach Boys, The Monkeys, The Kinks, so people can know that those are favorites of mine. I grew up listening to lots of old blues records. My dad was a hippie and listened to Frank Zapper, Captain Beef, those things. My mom was listening more to David Bowie, Simon & Garfinkel, and I grew up on all that stuff as Well, and then I move backwards and forwards in my own appreciation. I collected lots of Dixieland records and swing records and stuff when I was a kid, but also I moved forward and I've listened to lots of punk and post-punk and indie music and stuff like that.

[01:08:44.930] - Speaker 1
There are genres that I'm not so keen on, but it's more that there are artists I'm not so keen on within those genres or genres I'm less familiar with. I'm not quite a musical omnivore, but my tastes are for particular Converse, particular structures, particular things that don't quite map on to genre. But the next few gigs I'm going to, I'm going to go and see Steve Earle next week. I'm seeing Johnny Eccles from Love the week after. I'm seeing Pulp in July. I'm seeing John Cael in August. I'm seeing Martin Carthy in October. I'm seeing They Might Be Giants in November. Those are some of the people I'm going to see live over the next few months. I have a particular love for, as you can probably tell from the episodes, for 1950s L. A. R. And B. Music, Richard Berry, your Johnny Otis, Johnny guitar, Watson, all those people. I like New Orleans, piano music, Fats Domino, Dr. John, those people. But I'm missing out as much as I'm cooperating here. I have such a deep love for so many forms of music. It's hard to neatly categorize.

[01:09:58.520] - Speaker 2
Understood. Have you found out that any of the stories that you've told in the podcast, in past podcasts, have turned out not to be true?

[01:10:07.530] - Speaker 1
Not so far. I live in fear of that. I expect it to be the case. I wish that I'd been able to leave this podcast after Mark Lewis and had finished his Beatles trilogy of biographies, because Lewis's first Beatles biography, which only covers up to Love Me Do, rewrote their history so profoundly that I am sure that there are going be things in his next two books where I go, Oh, my God, did I actually say that? I am absolutely certain that the Beatles history is going to be substantially rewritten over the next decade as Lewis and gets his other two books out. I usually try and be very clear about this, but sometimes there are multiple versions of a story, and I will tell the story the version of the story that makes the most narrative sense, and there are other possibilities. I try and be very clear about that, but sometimes people will say, No, I really do think this other version of the story is what happened. But as far as I can recall, so far, there has been no case where I have said something, something of any substance that is actually definitely wrong.

[01:11:08.470] - Speaker 1
There have been times when I've misspoken or when there's been an aside. If you look on the podcast website, there's usually on many of the episodes, there's a little of an artist section where it'll be like, I've pronounced Walker Shore, Wisconsin as Waukesha, which people still pull me up about five years later, even though I've put a note on there saying that. But there are things of that nature. Obviously, one expect that as there's more scholarship, as you find out more, there will be things that turn out to be wrong. But so far, touch wood, I've not said anything outright wrong on a real major scale, no.

[01:11:44.530] - Speaker 2
Tell me about trad jazz.

[01:11:48.180] - Speaker 1
Okay. Trad jazz is a peculiarly British phenomenon of the '50s. Basically, the person who I am, the rather nerdy, scholarly music others who investigated musical history and found that the music they liked best was Dixieland jazz of the 1920s. There were some of them who would very specifically say things like, That Louis Armstrong ruined jazz music and everything after him is dreadful. They were trying, particularly to emulate people like Sidney Bershay, who were free and strong. They had this very... Many of them had this very rigid rules-bound idea as to what jazz should be. It was music that was from New Orleans up to and including 1924 and no later, basically, this thing. They would try and recreate that in a scholarly preservation way, very much like folk musicians and so on. But This, weirdly, became a massively popular genre in Britain in the '50s. Massive, massive genre. One of those weird flukes where something's more or less inexplicable. But there were some people in the Trad Jazz Movement, who were a little less rigid and a little less rule-bound than the others who, yes, they liked playing traditional Dixieland jazz music, but they liked other forms of music that were related to that.

[01:13:14.210] - Speaker 1
A lot of them particularly loved blues. A lot of them particularly love jug band music and things like that. From the Trad bands, playing some of this other music is where you get this skifle boom that came along in 1956, from records made in 1954, where people playing washboards and tea chest basses and so on, playing old lead belly songs. That comes out of the Trad Jazz boom. Even more than that, a bloke called Chris Barber, who was the pre-eminent Trad Jazz trombone player, He started bringing over American individual musicians to perform, backed by him and his band. He brought over Muddy Waters. He brought over Sister Rosetta Tharp, he brought over Sonny Terry and Brownie McGee, he brought over Louis Jordan, all these people and had them play backed by his band and tour written by his band. This is where the British Blues boom comes from. This is where the Rolling Stones and Manfred Mann and every British, the Yard Birds, all those bands learned about this music because of the efforts of basically one man, Chris Barber, bringing over all his favorite performers to play with a bunch of Dixieland musicians who are playing trombones and cornets and stuff.

[01:14:27.990] - Speaker 1
There's this wonderfully weird recordings Muddy Waters playing Koochee Koochee Man, backed by a Dixie Line jazz band. It really works, actually. But that was a huge, huge cultural movement in Britain. From about 1946 through to about 1962, Richard Lester His first film, who obviously went on to direct Hard Days Now and all these things. His first film was a cheapy-quicky called It's Trad Dad, featuring all these trad jazz bands, plus for some reason Chubby Checker and Del Shannon as well. It was the teen fad where you would have cheapy films made of it, even though the people doing it were these people who would get into furious arguments over who played Banja on some track from 1923.

[01:15:13.880] - Speaker 2
You referred to it, I believe, as a back to basics movement. I want to talk about the back to basics as a recurrent theme because it seems like music continually gets... There's a new thing, and then it gets built up, and variations It comes, and it grows, and then maybe 10 years later, there's this revolution where we go back to the basic version.

[01:15:37.840] - Speaker 1
Absolutely. We're just getting to that in the podcast at the moment. We've just gone past Sergeant Pepper and all these things, and we're now getting to a point where all the British Blues bands start to become big again. It is a recurring thing, and it seems to happen on every scale. In the course of the Beatles career, for example, you have them starting out with Love Me Do and then getting into the big Sergeant Pepper things and then going, No, we need to be a little four-piece band again and doing the get-back sessions. You have it over longer periods. Like I said, the Trad Jazz movement was a back-to-basics movement in reaction to modern jazz to Charlie Parker and your John Coltrane and so on saying, No, the real thing is these records from 1924. Punk is in many ways the same thing. Absolutely. Three Chords and the Truth. The The waifle movement was that. It's something that happens over and over again. I think it happens within bands careers. It also happens generationally, though, I think, as people come along who... If you're a 15-year-old kid, you can't make Sgt. Pepper in your parents' garage.

[01:16:49.330] - Speaker 1
You possibly could now with synthesizers and multitracking and so on on a laptop. But in 1967, you can't make Sgt. Pepper But you can play Louis Louis. Then you get the Stooges or whoever coming out. And then, not all the time, but a lot of these bands then become more musically sophisticated, then want to grow, then want to expand their own horizons, then want to experiment. And then you get 5, 10 years later, another load of teenagers coming along who are playing Louis Louis again or whatever. And I think as well, there is a case that people People's tastes only get so sophisticated and people need to be led in certain ways. The audience for popular music also ages out every so often. Certainly, up to through the '80s, most rock musicians or whatever are making music for people in a particular age bracket and people stop paying attention to music as they grow older, they get kids, they have a mortgage to pay, that thing. You have a new group of people whose ears need to be trained to get to more sophisticated music, to get to more complicated music. This combination means that music was very, very cyclical.

[01:18:05.430] - Speaker 1
I don't know to what extent that's still the case. I suspect with the access to everything all the time, world we live in now, I suspect it's possibly not as much the case now, but of course, I don't know because I'm a middle-aged man myself, so I don't know what the kids are listening to.

[01:18:22.710] - Speaker 2
Using the trad jazz example of music ended basically with Dixieland jazz and everything since is no good, I had the opportunity to work with ACDC. To ACDC, the end of music was Chuck Berry. Since Chuck Berry, nothing good happened. In their minds, they're carrying on the Chuck Berry tradition and that's it. Nothing in between.

[01:18:47.950] - Speaker 1
Well, of course, you can clearly hear that, but at the same time, they are clearly not doing the same thing as Chuck Berry 4. You would never mistake an ACDC record for a Chuck Berry record. Even if you are trying to recreate an earlier sound much more accurately than they're doing, even if you sit down and just play Chuck Berry riffs, the fact that you are playing a Chuck Berry rift now makes it different from Chuck Berry playing the rift in the '50s. Like the Burhez story, Pierre Ménard, the author of the Quixote, somebody sitting down and trying to write the whole of Don Quixote, exactly as Cervantes wrote it, is producing a different book because it's not the 17th century.

[01:19:27.670] - Speaker 2
It's a different world. The context changes. It means something different today.

[01:19:32.160] - Speaker 1
Absolutely. And so British Trad Jazz was trying to recreate what the Dixieland jazz musicians were doing. But of course, what the Dixieland jazz musicians were doing was trying to progress. They weren't trying to recreate anything. That in itself is always a tension. Every back to basics movement is doing something different from the basics that they think they're going back to. That's why we have different words for these things. That's why have more than five years' worth of records available. Because punk does not sound like '50s rock 'n' roll music. The AC/DC do not sound like Chuck Berry. The Beatles, the get-back sessions, do not sound like the Beatles in 1962. You can't go back, but you can try and take new lessons from the old things, and you can go down new unexplored paths from the start.

[01:20:26.010] - Speaker 2
How important is Elvis to the overall story?

[01:20:29.910] - Speaker 1
Very, very, very important. He is the reason why rock and roll became a cultural phenomenon rather than being a music, if you like.

[01:20:42.820] - Speaker 2
So he transcended music. Is that the idea?

[01:20:46.860] - Speaker 1
He became a thing in the culture. John Lennon talking about going and seeing Elvis films and seeing all the girls screaming and thinking, That looks like a good job. Elvis invented the Rockstar. Bill Haley had more records than Elvis early on. I believe Rock Around the Clock is still the best-selling vinyl single ever. But Bill Haley was just a bloke. He was just a singer. Elvis was a rock star, and Elvis was the first rock star, really. Again, there are always precursors for any cultural phenomenon. You can look back to Johnny Ray, you can look back to Frank Sinatra for examples of the thing that Elvis was in the culture. But Elvis combining that presence with this particular music is what made rock and roll into a thing that we're still talking about 70 years later in a way that we don't talk about other earlier musical movements in the same way. Elvis also fascinates me because he is the first person to hit a lot of the problems that the two of the artists hit later on because he is the first rock and roll star to hit a career slump and have a comeback and try and have a second act and try and deal with all the problems of what does it mean to be a rock star in your '30s and '40s, which obviously then all the other stars since had to deal with, and they often dealt with it in a different way than Elvis.

[01:22:09.020] - Speaker 1
But Elvis gives you a model of what to do and a model of what to avoid for all the musicians that came after him. Also, Elvis is such a racially problematic figure that he embodies a lot of the contradictions involved in talking about rock music at all, which is the way that it moved from being a music made primarily by black people to a music made primarily by white people. To what extent that's cultural appropriation, to what extent it is a normal process of give and take, to what extent you can extricate Elvis's incredible artistry from the fact that there were other similarly talented artists who never had his level of success because of their race. All those things play into Elvis's story as well. He is fascinating in many, many ways. He's possibly the single most fascinating figure in the whole of rock music history. I've got one more episode on Elvis lined up in about a year's time. There's a lot to say about the end of Elvis's career, which I don't think people have touched on very much. Although the recent Baz Lerman film did a little bit. It often gets misunderstood in a way that a lot of the stories I talk about in the podcast get misunderstood.

[01:23:28.260] - Speaker 1
But he is a fascinating central figure. I mean, there's... Kingy Friedmann tells a story. I don't know if it's true or not, but he tells a story of going to Borneo. There were isolated people there who only knew three words in the English language, Elvis, Jesus, and Coca-Cola. I think he has lost a lot of his cultural prominence again in the last 20 to 30 years as the generation that grew up with them has slowly died out. But you You can't tell the story of rock and roll without a lot of talk about Elvis. He did change everything. John Lennon said before Elvis, there was nothing. Of course, there was, but people didn't know about it.

[01:24:12.830] - Speaker 2
Who were the other lynchpin key artists in the story?

[01:24:17.780] - Speaker 1
The way I've been trying to structure the story so far is to have two or three artists who I'm telling their story through multiple episodes while hitting the other ones. Not all of them are artists. Well, for example, John Hammond is possibly the most important figure of all in the whole of 20th century musical history, and he's going to come up a lot more. For people who don't know, John Hammond, he was the person who suggested that Benny Goodman integrate his band in the 1930s. He was the first person to put on jazz and blues music in Carnegie Hall and to move that music into a concert setting. He discovered Billy holiday. He discovered Aretha Franklin. He discovered Bob Dylan. He discovered Bruce Springsteen. He discovered Stevie Ray Vawn. He discovered Leonard Cohen. A 50-year career. John Hammond turns up a lot in the podcast, mostly in background roles, but he's there a lot from the very first episode on. Johnny Otis is a massive, massive figure in the story of the '50s, and he's going to turn up again a little bit later on. But him discovering Little Richard, producing Big Mama Thornton's Hound Dog, getting the Robbins together who became the Coasters.

[01:25:21.610] - Speaker 1
He is one of the pivotal figures there. Elvis is a pivotal figure and Sam Phillips in the background again. Then in the '60s, it's obviously been the Beatles, the Beach Boys, because of their fieminence in the American music industry at the time. Phil Specter and Bob Dylan, although I haven't done that many episodes on Dylan, and we'll be doing episodes on Dylan's songs as well as on Dylan himself. He's an enormously influential figure. In the '60s, it is Specter for making record production considered an art in itself. There were plenty, to my mind, better record producers before him, but he was the first one to make the record producer as a thing, and then Motown and Stacks as entities, possibly Steve Cropper as an individual as well. Those are the big ones for much of the '60s. I don't want to do too much in terms of talking about the future because there's just spoilers in by the way. But Bowie is going to be in the same way that I've done an episode on a Beatles song for every year of the '60s. I'm probably going to do an episode on a Bowie song for every year of the '70s because he interfaced with so many different trends and was so connected I'm so connected with so many of them.

[01:26:31.650] - Speaker 1
And there were going to be artists like that. But to the point we've got to now in the narrative, it's the Beatles, Elvis, Johnny Otis, Sam Phillips, John Hammond, and Dylan are the... You pull any of them out and the story is different. Most of the others, the Rolling Stones, for all that they became massive and huge and are going to have more episodes and all that stuff. You can pull the Rolling Stones out of the story and another band takes their place. You can't pull the Beatles out of the story and have somebody else take their place. You can't pull Elvis out and have somebody else takes their place.

[01:27:05.090] - Speaker 2
If you watch any documentaries about the Rolling Stones, there's always references to the Beatles. If you watch anything with the Beatles, there's rarely a reference to the Rolling Stones.

[01:27:15.920] - Speaker 1
Exactly, yeah. That's not to downplay the Stones as musicians or their cultural influence or anything like that. Obviously, they had great influence and there were many, many bands who very explicitly copied the Stones, whether you look at the Stooges or Aerosmith or whatever. It's not to say they weren't influential, but they were the one that became biggest of a number of very similar blues bands playing at a similar time in a similar area. One of the others would have had that if it wasn't them. The Beatle Girls were something different. Elvis was something different. Then later on, Bowie is something different.

[01:27:51.860] - Speaker 2
Do you see Led Zeppelin as being a key figure going forward or maybe no?

[01:27:56.610] - Speaker 1
Yes and no. They are going to have multiple episodes devoted to them, but they're not going to be as massive a part of the story as some of these other people have talked about. They are a massively important link in a chain rather than a new starting point, if you see what I mean. You can tell, if you go back and listen, I have been slowly building up to Led Zeppelin forming for most of the '60s. Jimmy Page first entered the story in the first Beatles episode, actually, in a very minor role. I've talked about him. I've talked about John Paul Jones already, and these people are going to... They are a massively important part of the story, but they're not a central figure in the way some of these other ones are. They're like multiple episode band rather than a seven episode band. Understood.

[01:28:43.810] - Speaker 2
In one of the episodes, you talked about Dexter Gordon's music teacher in Los Angeles.

[01:28:50.000] - Speaker 1
Samuel Brown. Samuel Brown, yes.

[01:28:53.400] - Speaker 2
What do we know about Samuel Brown?

[01:28:55.660] - Speaker 1
He was an astonishing figure. He was the joint first Black person to become a teacher in LA at all. He was a scurrily talented musician. He was teaching an inner city LA group of mostly Black, I think, solely black kids, and they wanted to learn about their music. He taught them the proper rudiment of music. But he brought in guest speakers, This is a classic classic. This is into a normal high school. He brought in Lionel Hampton, he brought in W. C. Handy, the person who was credited as inventing the blues. He brought in Nat King Cole. He brought in William Grant Still, who was the first great Black American classical composer. He brought these people in to give guest lectures to the kids. If you look at the people he taught, he had Big Jay McNeely, who was the great honking R&B saxophone player of the '70s. He had Dexter Gordon, he had Art Farmer, he had Don Cherry, the great jazz trumpet player, used to skip school at his school to go and sit in on Samuel Brown's classes elsewhere. Then if you look at, I don't have a full list in front of me, but pretty much every one of the great Central Avenue musicians that seems to have gone to school and had music lessons from him.

[01:30:24.360] - Speaker 1
Jesse Belvin, who I've mentioned a few times. He died tragically young, but he co-wrote Earth Angel for the Penguins and these things. He was a massive, massive influence. He was taught by him. I think Arthur James was taught by him. If people go and just Google Samuel Rodney Brown and look at the list of people he taught, he taught half the black musicians to come out of LA. They all credit him as being like... One of his students said he was like Miles Davis or Charlie Parker. He was that influential to them. It's just an example of the difference that one teacher actually teaching the kids can make. Again, the fact that this was the first black teacher in, I think in California, certainly in LA at all. It's just an extraordinary story. Somebody needs to do a proper biography of him. He taught at Jefferson High, and without him, popular music for the last 70 years would be totally, totally different. Somebody needs to do a proper biography of him. It's not my area of expertise, but if there's somebody out there who wants to do that, please go and do it properly.

[01:31:36.800] - Speaker 2
I think you even mentioned Barry White, as modern as Barry White.

[01:31:40.180] - Speaker 1
Yes, Barry White was another of his students. Yes, Barry White was somebody who was a child prodigy. People have made claims that he played a lot of '50s R&B stuff. He didn't actually. He was like 11, 12 when some of these records were being made, that people talk about him playing on. But certainly by his early teens, he was already doing session work he was producing by his late teens. In the '50s, he was one of Samuel Brown's students. Yeah, this is the importance that this man had. Basically, you pick an LA black musician or a vocalist from any time from 1948 through 1965-ish. There's a 50/50 chance at least that Samuel Brown was their music teacher. Extraordinary, extraordinary man.

[01:32:26.100] - Speaker 2
It sounds like it's not even so much that he was a teacher is the story that you told about the trad jazz person, the one person who influenced the whole British Blues scene, he wasn't a teacher.

[01:32:41.680] - Speaker 1
No, Chris Barber, yeah. This is another thing that runs through the whole podcast, the way that tiny decisions by one person can have major, major ripples. In the case of Chris Barber, the really fascinating thing for me is Chris Barber, for people who don't know, a Tread Jazz trombone player. He was the one who, as I said earlier, brought over Muddy Waters, he brought over Otis Span, he brought over Sister Rosetta Tharp, all these people. But he wasn't even originally intending to be a musician. He went to a trad jazz gig and the trombone player at the front in the band was getting sick of it. He spoke to the kid in the first row, Hey, kid, want to buy a trombone? How much? Five pounds and six shillings, or however much it was. Chris Barber happened to have that exact amount of money him, so he bought a trombone. Because of that one decision, we have Larry Donegan's Skiffl Band, which led to the whole British rock and roll music. We have all the blues influence on Britain's music comes from Chris Barber. The Reading Festival, the second biggest rock festival in Britain and the longest running, was founded by Chris Barber.

[01:33:51.390] - Speaker 1
The Marquis Club, which is where all the bands like the Who and the Stones and everybody played in the early years, found it by Chris Barber. The whole of any British music made after about 1954 would not exist without Chris Barber at all. That just happened because the trombone player happened to be wanting to sell his trombone on a day that Chris Barber was in the front row and had the exact right change. On these tiny things, the world turns.

[01:34:20.250] - Speaker 2
Those are the things that make me believe that there's some higher wisdom involved in what's going on because it's too much. It's too Too much. I was doing research for a project related to one of the Beatles, and I spoke to Mark Lewison, and he said he's not a believer.

[01:34:42.530] - Speaker 1
Lewison?

[01:34:43.120] - Speaker 2
He had just finished the first volume of the 1,000-page volume of the Beatles. Up until the time, I think that they may have...

[01:34:51.430] - Speaker 1
Yeah, it's up to the first single. It goes to the end of 1962.

[01:34:54.200] - Speaker 2
It's a 1,000 pages up to the first single.

[01:34:56.990] - Speaker 1
That's the short version. He put out the The 900-page short version, the 1,700-page long version of the biography, up to the release of Love Me Too. Exactly.

[01:35:05.760] - Speaker 2
He said, I'm not a believer, and having just done this research, there are so many coincidences and so many things that went right, it's impossible. It couldn't have happened. The way that it actually happened could not have happened.

[01:35:24.940] - Speaker 1
Yeah, absolutely. This is a thing you find over and over and over again. Again, I wouldn't want to say if it's a higher power or whatever, because the alternative is, how many other times did something go wrong and we missed on something better than the Beatles? We can't know. But there are so many of these weird coincidences all through the story, all through every story. It's really, really odd. The other thing is the weird clumps of people you get. You read biographies series of Motown stars and you'll see, Yeah, well, I was at school with one of the four tops, and we went out to Smoky Robinson's house, and then Smoky Robinson was talking to Aretha Franklin. This is in 1955 or whatever. The fact that Smoky Robinson and Aretha Franklin knew each other when they were teenagers, how do you get that much talent in such a small area? There are two ways of looking at it. You can look at it as if it's like fate or providence, but you can also look at it as how many more smoking Robinsons and Aretha Franklin's are there out there that ended up working in McDonald's.

[01:36:36.560] - Speaker 1
That's a thought that keeps you up at night, if you think of it that way. But there are weird coincidences happening all the way through the story. Obviously, I highlight those quite a lot.

[01:36:47.790] - Speaker 2
In the Bill Haley episode, you mentioned that he was just a bloke, not remarkably talented, but he worked very hard, and he worked hard enough that we know who he is now.

[01:36:59.090] - Speaker 1
Yes, absolutely.

[01:36:59.890] - Speaker 2
Are there other examples of artists who it was just through grit that they were able to break through?

[01:37:07.970] - Speaker 1
I think that that's the case for a lot of artists, particularly in the '50s, and particularly American artists. It seems to be that once British bands start being big, because Britain has a much more centralized media and much more centralized scenes, you can go in three weeks from having your first rehearsal to having your first number one record, which happens a lot in the story. But on the other hand, you've got somebody like Jimi Hendrix. He was obviously immensely talented and obviously immensely charismatic and so on, but he had spent years and for a thousand years, honing his craft, playing for the Isie Brothers, playing for Little Richard, playing all these Wilson Picket, all these big soul and R&B stars. It was just playing rhythm guitar for them and learning his craft, learning his trade. And he was working a lot. There were people who were going to be coming up in the '70s who were like that as well from Britain. I mentioned Bowie before. Bowie is an example of somebody... He was trained from 1964 on to be a rock star. He didn't get anywhere until 1969. He didn't really become Bowie until about 1972.

[01:38:21.600] - Speaker 1
He just kept plugging along. So did Mark Bowen, who started out very, very connected with Bowie. Or there's a running joke in the podcast about Rod Stewart keeping almost being in famous bands. He was in the King's first rehearsal, but then they kicked him out. He almost played on My Boy Lollipop by Millie. He was just plugging away and plugging away and plugging away until 1969, 1970. He suddenly becomes big. There's this decade of him being that annoying person who's trying to get in the bands and is trying to be big and nobody really wants him. Or he's playing second fiddle to Jeff Beck. A lot of those in the glam era in Britain, a lot of people come up there who had been trying for a decade to become big. Elton John was another one. He'd been plugging away for years playing piano in Bluesology and all this thing before becoming Elton John. Some of the British glam rock stars had even had minor success in 1961, 1962, was almost like Cliff Richard knock offs and then spent another decade grinding away until coming up again in the early '70s. It's a more common story than you would think, really.

[01:39:40.610] - Speaker 1
But yeah, Bill Haley was almost thinking in the way that a lot of the more calculating stars of today, I think, in that he took his band around to play schools and noted the responses of the audiences and changed his setlist and changed his repertoire to fit what the teenagers were doing. He would play free shows at schools so that he could get audience metrics so that he could then change his music to fit the audience. This is how he goes from being a yodeler to being the first rock a whole star. Because if you listen to his early records, they're called things like Jodel My Blues away. They are accordions and yodeling records.

[01:40:26.320] - Speaker 2
The biggest changes between musical artists of the '50s through now? How would you describe the difference in who the people are or how you would describe them?

[01:40:39.190] - Speaker 1
There are multiple different changes. To be clear, I am not an expert on much music made this millennium. There's plenty of music I like from the last couple of decades, but it doesn't tend to be anything that is particularly well known. I know who Ed Sheeran is. I couldn't name you five of his songs, that thing. I wouldn't want to say too much about today, except that I believe that today, certainly in Britain, may not be the case for American stars, but certainly in Britain, becoming a certainly successful musician requires you to have been born in a life of relative privilege because over the last 50, 60 years, all the ways in which working and lower middle class people managed to become successful have been destroyed. There was the art college system, there was a strong level of unemployment benefits, there were arts funding for things like the Arts Labs, which is where David Bowie came through. All these things have been progressively, particularly over my lifetime, but even before that, they've been destroyed in such a way that now you have to have some form of capital in Britain. I don't know if this is the case elsewhere, but you have to have some form of capital and privilege to become successful at all.

[01:42:01.070] - Speaker 1
Not just in music, but in all the creative arts. There is a paucity of voices from outside a relatively narrow band of society at the moment, which wasn't the case in the '60s and '70s in Britain, which had the most opportunities for class mobility and had the most opportunities for people who were from poorer backgrounds to become successful in the arts, in the creative industries, generally, and in music in particular. But beyond that, I wouldn't want to say, but just in specifically rock music and discarding all other genres. I say something very early on, I think in the episode on Sister Rosetta Tharpe, that the story of rock music is in part the story of black men pushing out black women, then poor white men pushing out black men, then rich white men pushing out poor white men. I think that is, to a large extent, the truth. It's not the only truth, but it is part of the truth. That's partly, of course, because other genres like hip hop have become the genres where black performers can be bigger. But that is the way that narrative arc goes.

[01:43:13.870] - Speaker 2
It seems like hip hop completely trumps that argument, though.

[01:43:18.610] - Speaker 1
Yeah, but like I said, that's rock music, specifically. Obviously, hip hop starts out very, very interconnected with it, but quickly becomes its own thing. Yes, hip hop and also modern RnB and so on, they're still areas where Black people have huge amounts of success. Obviously, I think that's one reason why rock music has become a minority genre because it has become so culturally isolated and because it hasn't had any room for black people and that hasn't had much appeal to a lot of black people. Obviously, with tremendous numbers of exceptions, I am not saying black people don't like rock music or black people don't play rock music. I would never say that, but it is a very, very, very white space. Now, that genre is a very white space compared to the demographics of the population at large. I think that's for the worst for the genre.

[01:44:19.900] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the intermingling of different styles, like how cool jazz worked its way into rock and roll, how Bebop works its way into rock and roll, country, R&B, all of these different tangents?

[01:44:33.240] - Speaker 1
Well, what we originally called rock and roll in the '50s was actually a label that was put on multiple different genres to start with. Rock and roll was always not exactly a hybrid, but a a label, an umbrella label for a multitude of things. When the label was originally used, well, not when it was originally used, but when Alan Fried used it, he used it because the term rhythm and blues was already starting to be considered low class, like disgraceful in some way, even though rhythm and blues itself had only been brought in a few years earlier to replace race records. Alan Fried was using the term rock and roll to describe R&B records. But if you look at '50s R&B, Charlie Gillet, I think, isolated five different genres. You've got rockabilly, which is essentially that's hillbilly boogie. There is little or no difference between what Carl Perkins was doing and what people like the Maddox Brothers & Rose were doing a few years earlier. You've got the New Orleans piano music of people like Fats Domino, Lloyd Price, those things, this rolling R&B sound. You've got vocal group R&B, which we now call Do-up, which is really two genres in itself because West Coast Do-wop and East Coast do up very, very, very, very different things, but they're both emphasizing vocal harmony.

[01:45:51.850] - Speaker 1
Then you've got the Northeastern bands, of which Bill Haley is the only one that people really remember, but there were a few others like Freddie Bell and the Bell the Hellboyz, who were doing country music, but country music copying Louis Jordan records. Then to a lesser extent, you bring in Ches Blues, mostly through the influence of Chuck Berry, who was also very influenced by country music and things Look at that. Chuck Berry himself is almost the epitome of this because if you look at Chuck Berry, his first record, Maybelline, was inspired by Ida Red, the old Western Swing song. But he was playing a lot of his guitar lines were taken from Louis Jordan's guitarist, whose surname I can't remember, Carl something. But a lot of Chuck Berry's guitar lines were taken from Louis Jordan's guitarist. And Chuck Berry was also influenced by Nat King Cole. You listen to his vocals, Chuck Berry is doing Nat King Cole a lot of the time. So right from the start, this same label is being applied to Chuck Berry as is being applied to the Platas as is being applied to Fats Domino's as is being applied to Carl Perkins.

[01:46:55.030] - Speaker 1
So right from the start, you have this convergence of different music. A lot of the R&B music in particular is always very influenced by jazz. You can draw a very, very direct line between 1950s, Little Richard in particular, but also Chuck Berry, a lot of these piano and saxophone-led black R&B records of the '50s. You could draw a very, very clear line from them to Louis Jordan. From Louis Jordan to the big band. Louis Jordan started I started out playing with Chick Webb's band. He and Ella Fitzgerald were the front people of Chick Webb's band. Basically, what happens is in the '40s, it becomes uneconomical for the big band to talk So the big swing bands break up into three sub-genres, if you like. You have the Western swing bands, people like Bob Wills and so on, slim down, get rid of the trumpet players and so on, and revolve around the electric guitar This is what eventually leads to rockabilly. You have the black band like Chick Webb's Band. They basically slim down become Louis Jordan. You use electric guitars and very, very loud linking saxes to make up for the volume issue rather than having five sax at one place.

[01:48:22.250] - Speaker 1
You just have one bloke playing really loud. You also have the ones who then go off and become Bebot musicians. But there are still a lot of intermingling between these people. People like Big Jay McNeely was playing with the Bebop musicians or was also playing early R&B sessions. A lot of the Atlantic Records people, like Mickey Baker, he started out as a jazz man and he moved into playing R&B session work before then becoming part of Mickey and Sylvia and so on. Johnny Otis is the prime example. He desperately wanted to play like Joe Jones from Count Basie's Band. He was a jazz drummer and vibraphone player, and his first was Harlem Nocturn, but he ends up making Hound Dog and William the Handjive. There's always this jazz influence there in the background. Then this gets picked up again in the mid '60s, mostly by people from LA the doors and the birds and so on, because there is a thriving cool jazz scene there. The influence of cool jazz becomes something that, particularly the dope smoking musicians on the West Coast, get into this as a way to show their musical sophistication. A lot of these people are people who've come from folk music as well.

[01:49:38.990] - Speaker 1
But when they open their minds to other forms of music outside folk, they are not just opening their minds to rock music. They're opening their minds to everything. They start listening to a lot of cool jazz. They start listening to a lot of Indian music, largely because the Pacific Jazz label was also a fan of Ravi Shankar put out his stuff on that label as well. So you get all these influences coming in. In 1966, '67, you start getting 8 Miles High by the Bird, you start getting the Doors records, and you start getting this improvisational aspect adding to the music. Not always to the music's benefit, it has to be said. Some of this stuff is really, really good, but a lot of the time, the rock musicians don't have the chops that the jazz people did, and trying to do stuff and not really getting it. There's a cargo cult element to some of the use of improvisation in psychedelic rock music that makes some of it a little painful to listen to these days. Yeah, you're doing John Coltrane, but you're not John Coltrane. Also around this time, you start getting the influence of avant-garde classical musicians, of people like John Cage, the Velvet the Velvort Underground episode I did recently is another one where the Velvet Underground don't get together until, I think, over an hour into the story in that case, because I'm talking about how John Kael was influenced by John Cage and by a whole history of avant-garde experimental noise composition.

[01:51:19.080] - Speaker 1
That gets into rock music, yes, through the Velvort Underground, but also as well through Yoko Ohno's influence on John Lennon. Yoko Ohno was part of the Fluxus Art Movement with Lamont Young, who is one of the most abstract composers around. And that influence goes into the Beatles as well. And a lot of the time, these people have only taken... Not in the case of the Velvo underground, because John Kael was properly, very, very heavily schooled musician. But a lot of the other people are taking surface-level elements of these things and trying to incorporate them into their music. But that can sometimes be a good thing in itself. Some of my favorite My favorite music actually is the cheap pop act who were trying to pick up on psychedelia and didn't really know what it was other than that you've got a sitar on there. Something like Green Tampereen by the Lemon Pipers. It's a ridiculous record It's good. But it works. Yes. One of the things that rock music does at its best, and it seems to have stopped doing over the last 30 or 40 years, and that hip hop does a lot now, is this a pie tendency of picking up little bits from everywhere and sticking them together and just going for the shiny thing.

[01:52:37.130] - Speaker 1
But the shiny thing is shiny.

[01:52:39.850] - Speaker 2
I haven't heard an episode where you mentioned Dean Martin yet. I thought it's interesting because Dean Martin was both the reason Elvis died his hair black was because of Dean Martin, and Jim Morrison clearly was influenced by Dean Martin's singing style.

[01:52:56.370] - Speaker 1
He definitely was. I think I might have mentioned Dean Martin talking about Bob Dylan's response to Dean Martin, Insulting the Rolling Stones. But that's about it. But yeah, I mean, Dean Martin was clearly very influential, particularly on Elvis. If you listen to Dean Martin's '50s stuff and then to Elvis singing ballads, you can very, very clearly hear the influence there. He will possibly come up in passing in a couple of episodes that I'm going to be doing. He may well come up when I talk about the doors next, when I talk more about Morrison's singing style, because yet Morrison was very clearly a crooner and very clearly, specifically influenced by Dean Martin. Also, there is going to be some stuff about Frank Sinatra in one episode coming up in the future, and I may talk about Dean Martin there. Other than that, the only time I talked about him was in a bonus episode on Dino Dezzie and Billy, because obviously Dino from Dino Dezzie and Billy was Dean Martin's son. There were a lot of these lacuna that I hope to fill in because there is so much to talk about. One of the things I'm discovering as I do this Eventually, you have to incorporate the whole history of the world.

[01:54:03.020] - Speaker 1
It's endless. It's endless. Yeah. But yeah, Dean Martin is somebody... If I've been doing hour long episodes when I was doing the early Elvis ones, I would undoubtedly have talked about Dean Martin's vocal influence on Elvis. The other big Once again, you were talking about the Neapolitan singing style and stuff like that. I have possibly not covered the white vocal pop of the '50s and early '60s in as much detail as I would if I went back and read the whole thing from the start now, simply because this was still in the period where I was doing 25 to 45 minute episodes rather than the Monsters that I'm doing now. You have to cut out something. But it is something that I'm going to try and find a way to retroactively bring that stuff into the story.

[01:54:51.950] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the world of message boards and posting. I know nothing about this world and I'm just curious about it.

[01:54:59.540] - Speaker 1
Well, I have basically lived my entire life online. I first got online in 1997 and stuff. I actually don't spend that much time on message boards and so on now these days because I'm mostly on Twitter and things like that. But much of my late adolescence and early adulthood was spent on message boards discussing things like the Beach Boys in particular, but also other music things. They still exist, but not to anything like the same extent. But it was where you would go to have discussions. You would end up making friends who would say, Oh, I've got this bootleg. I can send you a copy, that thing. Particularly in the case of not on covered bands, but under covered bands. Much of my knowledge of the Beach Boys, for example, comes from forum conversations rather than from anything that's in books. Quite often in those forum conversations, you'll find out that the stuff in the books was wrong. You read Look this and vibrate smile by Dominic Prior, and he says that Brian Wilson intended smile to be sequenced as one long piece of music. Then you'll have somebody who's gone through all the session logs and he's like, No, this is definitely absolutely wrong.

[01:56:14.280] - Speaker 1
Brian actually intended this and we can tell this because on this date, he hired these musicians. Unfortunately, a lot of that documentation becomes ephemeral, so you can't reference it. You can't point to a conversation from 2003 on a message board that's now been deleted and say, This is why This thing. But a lot of the really deep music obsessives spent much of the early 2000s, in particular, hanging around on message boards, just amassing huge amounts of information, often on their very, very specific niche interests. In the case of the Beach Boys, there would be people who would post hundreds of thousands of words, literally over the course of a couple of years, just about the smile album and the making of that album and this thing. And there are still communities like that. Steve Hoffmann board, for example, which I sometimes visit but never post on, which is primarily an audiophile board, but that has some of the best discussion of vintage music around and some of the most accurate discussion. A lot of that stuff is people who know more about their tiny bits of expert knowledge than the authors who write books that get made public.

[01:57:26.060] - Speaker 1
A lot of the time when I'm telling the stories in the I end up busting myths of one another. Often I can usually find enough reference in conventionally published material to do that, but I only know to look in the conventionally published material in the right places because of discussions I had there, again, sometimes 20 years ago or whatever, but stuff sticks with you.

[01:57:47.860] - Speaker 2
Understood. Beautiful. Thank you so much for doing this. It's a pleasure talking to you. I want to thank you for the podcast. It's been wonderful. I'll share with you. It works just as well episodically if you jump around because I have not I started from the beginning and listened to every episode. I started by listening to songs that I like and then have expanded from there. I jump around all the time and it works great.

[01:58:10.950] - Speaker 1
Thank you. Thanks very much. Thanks.
