[00:00:07.980] - Speaker 1
Tétragrammaton.

[00:00:08.820] - Speaker 2
Tétragrammaton.

[00:00:09.870] - Speaker 1
Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton.

[00:00:13.830] - Speaker 2
Tétragrammaton.

[00:00:16.620] - Speaker 1
Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Never who I identify as. What am I? It's more of a surfer than anything. It's the The first thing I can remember doing as far as an activity or any hobby or something like that. It was just always there. My older brothers had boards, and I got the hand me downs. And My dad surf. My mom used to go out and boogie board with us, and it was like a family thing, which is something we all did together. He had these real early memories of being on the front of my dad's board, taking off on the waves, and then seeing the curl of the wave coming over, and then totally wiping out and feeling his hand reaching for me and finding me underwater and those things and bringing me up to the surface. It would freak me out at times, but he was always there. Thinking back, it felt wild to be that out of control. But now knowing how competent he was in the water and then doing it with my own children, it was only an arm's reach away on probably a really small little wave, but it felt gigantic back then.

[00:01:29.150] - Speaker 1
But those are some of the I have these memories. I don't even remember when I started. It was just something I've always done since I could stand before I could ride a bike, that thing. The relation to music, I don't know. It's like...

[00:01:41.080] - Speaker 2
Well, just everything. Not just music. It feels like surfing It's a different than everybody else.

[00:01:47.470] - Speaker 1
Yeah, it's a strange thing to do if you think about it. It's really easy now that it's become a pop culture and it's the commercial aspect of it. But my dad's generation, it was definitely a subculture. Architecture. And then I was around during the time in the '80s when it was shifting and becoming mainstream and stuff. But if you go to the root of what it is and think about it, it's such a strange thing to do. It's like these waves that travel across an ocean, and they finally are far enough from the source where the wind and everything basically started these swells up and they have time to separate into these clean things. It's that last moment before they hit the shore, you're paddling out just far enough to try to catch one, use the The gravity, and then the momentum you get to get back up higher, and then the gravity down again, and then you use that momentum, and you get in this rhythm where it produces speed, and then to learn to improvise as the wave changes and all the different turns you can do. It's like some of them are functional, and then some become these aberrations that you just do for a creative gesture on the wave.

[00:02:54.060] - Speaker 1
It's like an empty canvas. You see people, they ride them in a way that is really inspiring. You see somebody else. When we were kids, I can remember the first time we all saw Kelly Slater surf. He's the most popular surfer in the world. When he was a teenager, he came to Hawaii, and we all thought we were pretty good. And all of a sudden, we saw what he was doing on a wave. Hold on, we can We can do that. But of course, we couldn't do that. But we could try, at least. It elevated the idea of what we could do on a wave.

[00:03:21.510] - Speaker 2
And was Jerry Lopez still around at that time when you were growing up?

[00:03:24.750] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[00:03:26.470] - Speaker 2
Jerry-he was a North Shore.

[00:03:28.090] - Speaker 1
He was a North Shore. Yeah, he lived on the North Shore at that time, moved to Maui eventually. But yeah, I've always known Jerry on some level. He was a childhood hero for all of us. But surfing was a strange thing because it's a very small world. And so even though we would have these heroes, like Tomern was my hero as a kid. Then once a year, for a few months, he'd be on the North shore where I grew up, and I'd see him around. You could be in the line behind him at the store or something and be like, There he is. That whole thing of getting to meet your heroes happened real early for me, and it was a good thing. Just realized people were human. Jerry Lopez, Tom Curran, Mark Occalupo, these were all... I'd see them in magazines, or we'd see them in movies, surf movies. We just would watch every single one, and we would try to go out and emulate what they were doing on the waves and bend our back knee just how they were, hold our hands how they were and everything. But then you'd see them in real life, and you could talk to them.

[00:04:22.990] - Speaker 1
So that was a strange thing. But Jerry Lopez, he was friends with my dad. My dad was a little older than him, but they would hang out from time to time. He was always really sweet to me. Jerry and I are really good friends to this day.

[00:04:36.400] - Speaker 2
Surf movies are so interesting. They have so much power. Remember the movie Riding Giants?

[00:04:41.770] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[00:04:42.380] - Speaker 2
When that came out, I had a plan with a friend of mine to go see it in a movie theater at midnight. We were both in a terrible mood, and it was late, and we were the only people in the theater, and we got there and just like, What are we doing here? Let's go to sleep. Then the movie started, and it could have been 10 hours long. It was so much fun to fall into the world of surf, even through film. There's something about some magical connection between film and surfing, you can watch it forever. How do you think it works?

[00:05:19.610] - Speaker 1
I don't know. I have great memories, though, of being a kid when we were probably 14, 13, 14, and a surf movie had come through town. It was still that era where there was no surf movies on our TV screens yet. If you wanted to see one, you had to go to the cinema and actually go to the movie theater, and everybody would be all surfers in there, and it'd be packed in. When they would start the film, the lights would go down, everybody would be hooting and hollering. Then when the first wave would come on, It was like the energy that would be in that room. It felt like you were riding the wave, something to do with how they captured it on the film. I think especially the water shots. When you first see something, whether it's or listen to it, music or film, and it's just you're experiencing the pure art, you're not thinking about how it's made. As a kid, I can remember the way that surf films felt. Then later, I made surf films. I got into camera work and studied it. I had some I had an idea. As soon as I got on the water with my first water housing, it was easy.

[00:06:21.860] - Speaker 1
The only tricky part was learning how to load the film, how to set your F-stop, and all that stuff was what you had to learn. But for surfers, we all knew exactly where to be to get the shot. So I could load my camera for anybody when we were making surf films, and I would give it to any surfer, and they could get the perfect shot because they knew where to position themselves on a wave. And so I'm jumping ahead, but thinking back to when we were kids and seeing those water shots, they were shot by people that had this really beautiful relationship with the ocean and knew exactly where to be to get the perfect shot. And so as they're coming by in super slow motion, you get to experience that. I think for somebody who doesn't surf, it's a I was just thinking you could probably get to that feeling of surfing, those slow motion on 35 millimeter shots coming past the camera.

[00:07:08.810] - Speaker 2
So cool. Were you the first generation of surfers who grew up watching surf movies to make surf movies? Yeah.

[00:07:19.230] - Speaker 1
So I grew up... You saw the old classic surf in the summer, or endless summer, sorry. And then there was other ones that Jack McCoy was a great filmmaker, Again, somebody I'd see around. And the first water housing I ever had was one of Jack McCoy's old ones that was in my brother's garage. I found it and I asked him. He said, Oh, I think that's Jack McCoy. So I called him and he let me have that. It held a bowl-ex, like a wind-up, that 60 your camera. So growing up on the Jack McCoy films, and then later, Taylor Still was making these films that he was just a few years older than me, and he was a kid when he was making them, though. So we were still teenagers when those films were coming out. So So that was the switch from film to video, where all of a sudden any teenage kid could do it. But Taylor Still was doing it the best. He had that work ethic where he was happy to sleep on a floor, he was happy to barely get any food and just travel and sleep on the beach or whatever.

[00:08:16.810] - Speaker 1
He was getting the shots, and he was with all the surfers that everybody wanted to see. And so that generation of surf films, it was all video. It was less cinematic, but it was really exciting for us. How he was capturing these moments that nobody really could unless you were friends. That's the thing. He was a friend amongst the surfers and got something really special. So you're responding not only to nature, but to the source, to talk talking about how when referencing the book you wrote recently, and I really enjoyed reading that and listening in my car. When somebody produces something and puts it back into the world, it becomes part of the source. And so we were responding to those surf films.

[00:09:00.020] - Speaker 2
How much did it change when it went from 16 Millimeter to digital? It's great that you got to experience the 16 Millimeter version of it. Yeah.

[00:09:09.600] - Speaker 1
And so what we did was being that the films I grew up on during that time where you're not thinking about how they're made or not even aware of what digital or 16 is, that's the films I grew up on. Then when I was aware, it switched over to digital. There was a certain feeling I was missing from when I was a kid. When I went to film school in Santa Barbara, studied film, and I knew how to work a 16-millimetre camera, and I knew all these guys from growing up. I was actually, when I graduated, thinking, there's no way I'm going to make surf films. I'm going to do something else. Then I got invited on my first surf trip, and I thought, why wouldn't I go? I'll get some practice. As soon as I went, I guess in my mind, I was like, I don't want to sit on the beach and film my friend surfing. I don't want to surf. It's the last thing I want to do. But that first surf trip I did, my forehead came off from too much done. The whole thing pealed off because I'd film for probably six hours a day if the waves were good.

[00:10:06.640] - Speaker 1
Then I would surf for another four or five hours on my own. When they were taking breaks, I would just have some granola bars in my pocket or something. They were all really sweet because as soon as I'd finish filming, I'd load up my cameras and they would take them for me back to the boat or wherever we were, and I'd go surf. It was a lot of fun. But our idea was to make them all on 16 millimeter. The films that we did, Thicker Than Water, and September sessions and other ones I worked on, they were 100% shot on 16 millimeter. We didn't have any digital video in there at all.

[00:10:37.690] - Speaker 2
Was anyone else doing that?

[00:10:39.880] - Speaker 1
Not really at the time that I heard about. I met some older filmmakers that had switched over to digital. And it's one of those things you hear these conversations with music a lot of times when technology becomes available, why wouldn't you switch over? Some of them didn't really get what we're doing. Why the video is so good, this and that? Why would you... It's too hard. You got to get it processed, and you got to travel through all the TSA stuff with your film, and it's going to get radiated. There's all these problems, and they'd always be like, just shoot on video. It's so much easier. But we had this idea of just like, no, it's got to be 60 millimeter, the whole film. I had a certain feel that at the time, you definitely couldn't capture that film. These days, more and more, there's apps, things you can put on, effects to try to make it look like an old film. But at that time, you weren't capable of really getting the look still. We wanted that look.

[00:11:27.440] - Speaker 2
It's also a different head when when you're working in analog because you have limited resources. You can't shoot forever.

[00:11:34.770] - Speaker 1
Yeah, that's true.

[00:11:35.850] - Speaker 2
So there's a more considered point of view from the beginning.

[00:11:39.740] - Speaker 1
Yeah, there's limitations that are nice sometimes. Sometimes I'd bring a certain amount of film that I would guess we were going to need on that trip. The waves would be really good or the scenery would be so beautiful that I'd use all the color film, and all of a sudden, I'd be like, Sorry, guys, I only have black and white left. And I see those films now, and I look and there's surf sessions there in black and white, and it's not a post production choice we made. It's just I only have black and white film. But I see it and I love it. I love the way it looks, and I love the fact that it was what we had. It's what we had to use. So cool.

[00:12:10.100] - Speaker 2
So when you went to film school, you didn't go to film school thinking you were going to make surf film? No.

[00:12:15.160] - Speaker 1
At first, I had no idea when I went to school what I wanted to do. And I was actually studying math at first. And I met my wife. She was my girlfriend then, but we're still married. She was taking math, too. And I think part of the reason I stuck with math is her. I just wanted I would be in classes with her. Then she would tutor me. I think she was the one that told me at some point, I don't think you should be a math major. She saw me go from probably getting a B to a C to a D. There was actually a class called Transition to Higher Mathematics, and I was in that class, and I didn't make the transition. I remember her saying, You better think about something else. She was a double major, my wife. She was math and art. She loved architecture. I think that was the plan at that point. She knew all these art students, too, as as well as being in the math class. And so she took me to this thing called Real Loud, and it was a student film festival. They would project it and people would either do...

[00:13:10.540] - Speaker 1
You'd make your sounds. If you wanted footsteps, they would have a box and they had microphones down there. People could either make the sound effects as the film was playing or there would be a band playing, doing the background music for the film. But it was all live. And I was so moved by it. It was called Real Loud, and it was R-E-E-L, Real Loud. And I was talking to it. Somebody was sitting next to me that had made one of them, and they were like, This is my final project. This is what I've been working on this quarter. And I remember thinking right then like, Wait, I could be doing this instead of these mouth glasses? And so I switched over, next day, I went and changed it to film. I just love making stuff. I mean, I've been in bands at that point. We had a college band going, whether it was making that or I was always making these little animation things when I was a kid. I had a little video camera, and I'd have to actually push, record Stop. Then change the frame, record, stop. It was a real subtle thing where if you went too quick, it actually didn't even take a frame.

[00:14:06.200] - Speaker 1
But if you went too long, it looked dumb. But I would make those things all the time. I love making stuff, visual and audio. It just real quickly became a thing of just working on student films, whether it was helping a friend do a documentary or acting in somebody else's film. Sometimes whatever it took to get these projects done, that became everything. I think at first, maybe in my mind, I was thinking about films I didn't see it in the movie theaters and stuff. I didn't really know how it worked. I didn't realize you had to move to LA. And LA was always big for me. Being from Hawaii, Santa Barbara felt like a big town at the time. Then I started thinking, Oh, maybe documentaries, because I didn't really want to have to move to it would and be based there. I always loved going into LA. It was always really exciting for me, but I loved being able to get out, too. Even as the music career started, I remember going and playing little clubs, but also being excited to get out. It was just really big. It was like a big city, and I still like it for a lot of reasons, but it's overwhelming for me, too.

[00:15:05.160] - Speaker 1
So I think with the film, I started thinking, maybe I'll do documentaries because I love documentaries. I took a documentary filmmaking class that I loved. So I thought, you know what I'd be really good at is being up in a tree and just waiting all day long with the bait out for the bird and waiting for that moment and capturing it. I thought, I have all the skillset for that. I can go a long time without eating. I love nature. The idea of just being the solitude of waiting for those shots all day appealed to me. And so that was my goal. And then I thought, okay, well, these surf films are perfect. They're basically documentaries, and it's in this world I'm already a part of, so it'll be my practice. And it was actually, I think, the first step of making surf films was the perfect first step, and I was on my way to do that. And then the music thing took over, which was fine. And I ended up loving it so much and realizing I liked it even more. I It always felt like filmmaking is the best job I could have.

[00:16:02.080] - Speaker 1
And then the music never felt like a job. It was always a hobby. And when I got to do that for my job, it was a no-brainer just to follow that wave as far as it would go.

[00:16:11.650] - Speaker 2
You mentioned loving nature. Do you think growing up in Hawaii impacted your love of nature? In other words, if you grew up in a city, might you not be connected in the way that you're connected?

[00:16:20.970] - Speaker 1
Yeah, hard to ever know. But I think so. I think growing up in Hawaii and just the experiences I had and the way my parents were and the way my dad was, he was not antisocial. He was a really nice person. He loved people, but he was pretty eccentric, and he loved getting away from everything. He sailed to Hawaii when he was 21 years old or 20 on a 27-foot boat by himself. Wow. He left California. He always joked around. That's how he learned how to sail. He knew how to sail, but he definitely wasn't ready to sail to Hawaii by himself at that point. But he left, and he did it.

[00:17:00.440] - Speaker 2
Was he from California?

[00:17:01.350] - Speaker 1
He was from California. He grew up in South Bay area, Manhattan Beach. And they had my oldest brother at the time. He was one. So my mom flew over with him, and they met him over there. And fingers crossed, he'd make it, and he made it. So then we never left. But, yeah, so he would always take us on trips. He was always on boats. He loved boats, and he loved to get away to places that were far from society, and then always come back. But I remember a lot of times wondering, because sometimes you leave for a month or two to help somebody sail a boat from... A lot of times people like to sail a boat downwind, but they don't want to necessarily have to go back upwind to get it home. And so he would be somebody that people would hire to help get their boat home.

[00:17:44.480] - Speaker 2
Like with the downwind Winders, stand-up paddling.

[00:17:46.720] - Speaker 1
So he would do that sometimes, and he would be gone for a while. And I remember as a kid being like, I wonder if dad's coming home. But my mom always seemed like he was coming. But it would be a month or two that I wouldn't see him sometimes. Not all the time, but just from time. I think he needed that, like little breaks, and then you'd come back ready to participate again. Joyful participation.

[00:18:07.520] - Speaker 2
What was the music playing in the house that you grew up in?

[00:18:10.830] - Speaker 1
A lot of Ray Charles. I remember as a kid, it seemed like Ray Charles and Arthur Franklin, Cat Stevens, Paul Simon, Beatles, and Bob Marley, things like that.

[00:18:25.540] - Speaker 2
Was there a piano or guitar in the house?

[00:18:27.440] - Speaker 1
No. Yeah, guitar for my older brother. My parents, we had a record player and a record collection, and music would always be on. A lot of like, comedy records and stuff, too. We'd always stand up comedy.

[00:18:40.540] - Speaker 2
Was it more your mom or your dad's musical taste, or were both?

[00:18:44.030] - Speaker 1
I think both. Yeah, my mom liked Aretha Franklin a lot, and Tina Turner in the '80s and stuff. I remember that always being on. Then I had two older brothers that were 10 and seven years older than me. They were brothers, but they were almost like uncles because I was so much younger. And they just seemed like the coolest in the world to me. And so they were into music and different types of music a little bit because the oldest was from the '70s and a little more into rock. So his stuff was Black Sabbath and Queen. I can remember he had his own record collection. And then I got this little plastic record player, the little kid one, but it actually worked and stuff. And he would sometimes let me have a few of his. I remember I used to have five records over next to my bunk, and it was like Men at Work, Queen, Kiss, and Black Sabbath. They were the records. The imagery I can remember were on those records. And then the middle brother, where he's older than me, but the one in the middle, he was in the more '80s stuff.

[00:19:40.360] - Speaker 1
So then a lot of Violent Femmes. He would make me cassettes, and I had one that was the whole first Violent Films record on one side, and it was the doors on the other side. That was something I always listened to. It was just the auto flip on my Walkman and stuff. Those were early records for me, too.

[00:19:57.270] - Speaker 2
Did you ever listen to music when surfing?

[00:19:59.900] - Speaker 1
In college, it's funny you say it because I made my own little... I put some duct tape around the headphones so that water couldn't get in the little holes. Then I had a waterproof. It was one of those yellow, Sony water. It said water resistant, I think, but I figured good enough. And I think I even ducted that a little. Or I put it in a ziploc bag, and I figured out how to make my own little water resistant. And not only if it was longboarding, if it was a day where I knew that I could pretty much get to the lineup without having to dunk a wave. And I might fall off, but hopefully I thought it was pretty small. And then I'd put music on James Brown, usually. I had a James Brown cassette that I love surfing to. And so, yeah, I used to, in college, have the little point breaks in Santa Barbara. It was a way to make it extra fun.

[00:20:41.970] - Speaker 2
Cool. Have you ever done stand-up paddling?

[00:20:45.620] - Speaker 1
A little bit, not a whole lot. But yeah, in the summertime, we're on the North shore, you got to find things to do because the waves get flat for about three months. So sailing, stand-up paddling, just snorkeling and that stuff.

[00:21:00.720] - Speaker 2
Did you ever get into body surfing?

[00:21:02.080] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I love body surfing. That's something we did quite a bit. And again, on that whole thing of meeting your heroes, the best body surfer in the world, Mark Cunningham. He lived next door to me. So I was on for Mark. He was a little older than my brother's, by a few years, but he was just the definition of cool when we were kids. So he was always around. And somebody I still talk to quite a bit and keep in touch with and still an inspiration. But yeah, so we'd go body surf with him, and he would He never really give us tips, but we could just watch what he was doing and try to do that. It's the purest, I think, at some point when we figured out you could ride a wave without any board or anything. Some of my friends are really good without even the swim fins on. I always like having swim fins myself. But Dave Rostowitch from Australia, he's an amazing body surfer, and he likes no fins. Just that's the purest. He's got nothing. He's just body surfing with just the body.

[00:21:55.910] - Speaker 2
Something about it that's so much fun. It just feels so good. The way the When the water passes over your body feels so good.

[00:22:02.760] - Speaker 1
There's certain waves that work better for it. It's like if the wave's turning inside out and it's not peeling too fast. When they peel too fast, you need the board and the fins on the bottom of the board to be able to project yourself down the line. But certain waves, when they curl over and the whitewash inside, it comes out of the tube and you can ride on top of that to come out. I love those type of waves for body surfing.

[00:22:29.280] - Speaker 2
Do you think you're making films or surfing or music? Is it all the same to you or are they really different?

[00:22:37.500] - Speaker 1
It's a good question. I'd have to think about it. It's like surfing can be a lot of different things. Surfing can be really light where it's just about being with a bunch of friends. Sometimes I'll see... Waves aren't good at all, but I'll look out and I'll recognize two or three of my friends that I haven't seen in a few weeks, and I'll just want to go out and sit and talk. We might get one wave in an hour, but it's really about sitting out in the lineup just talking to each other and catching up. So it's like a social thing sometimes. Sometimes it's solitude, and I just need time by myself. And it's like the exaggerated version of it, or the better version is when you're on a sailboat and you can see the land, and the land making it smaller and smaller. And at some point, when you're able to look and all around you is just horizon and no land, I love the way that feels. You get that on a sailboat, but you get a little light version of that if the waves are big enough and you're far enough off Off the Coast and you look back in the land feels a little further away.

[00:23:34.160] - Speaker 1
It's like a reset for me. It's maybe a small version of what I was talking about with my dad being able to get away from society a little bit. And even if it's only for two or three hours or if the waves are really good and you stay out for a while. But I love floating off in the ocean for a while. That's the deeper level of the solitude you get. If the waves are really good, you get really pulled into it where it's just... It's like a craft you've worked at your whole life that you don't have to think about anymore. Sometimes I'll see a friend riding a wave as I'm paddling out, and the thing I'll see them do just seems like magic. They'll get totally upside down as they're hitting the lip of the wave and then coming back down. I'll think, How in the world they just do that. Then on your next ride without thinking, you're doing the same thing, but it's all muscle memory, and it's all just this flow that you get in. That's a really beautiful state to get into, is to do something that feels It's almost like a magic trick, like something you shouldn't be able to do, but all of a sudden your body is doing it.

[00:24:34.600] - Speaker 2
Yeah. Does that ever come up when you're writing?

[00:24:39.560] - Speaker 1
Writing, sometimes. I guess there's two parts of writing for me. I like what Joseph Campbell talks about, about how a myth is a dream for a culture, and a dream is an individual myth, but they're the same thing. For me, there's two parts to most songs. There's no rules, but I'll find I'll start a song and I have no idea what it's about, usually. There's usually one line, and that's the myth part, where it's, I don't know where it came from, and it's either something I've heard somebody say, or maybe it's just echoing in my mind. It tends to end up being the chorus. For some reason, and I'll get a lot of those, I don't stick with all of them. There might be 30, and one of them will work. But it's like the song structure becomes asking myself, why is this sticking around in my mind, and why is it keep echoing all day long? Then the verses become trying to answer that question in a way. Part of it, I'm not sure where it comes from, and it's that thing. The other part is very intentional, and I'll sit down and try to answer the question.

[00:25:42.380] - Speaker 1
It's usually later at night when it's quiet around the house, and I'll pick up an acoustic guitar and intentionally write and think and struggle. And that part's more work.

[00:25:52.270] - Speaker 2
That's the craft part.

[00:25:53.650] - Speaker 1
The craft part. But it's like... And you need some of that, I think. But some of the ones that really connect, especially just goopy love songs all come really quick. So some of my songs, I have songs that are... I literally have one song that was a reaction to my wife not responding when I'd stayed up all night writing this other song. So I played her a bit of it, and she didn't seem to even care. She has to hear them all the time. I joke because she's really sweet, and she's like my editor. She gives me feedback all the time on the songs. But this one morning, she didn't really respond. And I wrote this other one that was just joking. I said, You hardly even notice when I try to show you. The song is meant to keep you from doing what you're supposed to. Then she turned around and she's like, That's a good one, though. Then I was like, All right. I just worked on that for a minute. I have that part of it. I have songs I write at 2:00 in the morning, and I'm thinking about the weight of the world.

[00:26:52.470] - Speaker 1
Then there's other songs that are just to make my wife laugh. They're both valid. They're both music. They're both parts of what I like to do. Anyway, some songs like that, they come really quick, and they're not meant to carry much weight.

[00:27:07.730] - Speaker 2
Have you always written songs the same way? Has the process always been the same?

[00:27:12.440] - Speaker 1
I think it's interesting after you do eight or nine records, and then you're able to look at them and analyze the process. I think when I did my first album, and I think this is a case for most people, I had 20 songs to choose from because I'd been writing for... I guess I'd only been for a few years, but it was just flowing out and there was all these ideas. Then so you choose 12 of those. When I did my second record, there was already seven things floating around, and I built off of that. I think after I got my third album done, that was the first time where I was like, Well, I have no songs. If I do a fourth, I'm going to have to start from scratch and start writing. Then the process became... I became more aware of the process. Before that, I didn't even think about it. It was just always happening. Then I started thinking thinking a little bit like inhaling and exhaling. It's like you can't constantly exhale. You have to inhale. And so you hear terms like when people would say things like writer's block. I think the very first time I didn't have any songs, I consider that idea, which I think is almost a little naive.

[00:28:19.200] - Speaker 1
It's like, Oh, do I have writer's block? But all I had to realize was just I had to inhale for a while. I had to take the source back in. I had to just read books and experience life And not even... Sometimes I don't pick up a guitar for months. And I think when that used to happen, I almost felt guilty. Like, Oh, shouldn't I be practicing or something? But now I enjoy the process when I know, Oh, it's time to inhale. And then find a little melody, and I'll either record that on my phone these days or back. I used to have little four-track recorders, and I'd get the ideas down on those. Those are all floating around. Then at some point, my wife usually helps me when she... It seems It's like you have an album worth of ideas around now. Then we would sit down and intentionally make a list. We don't have names for them yet, but I got to call this one this. She really helps me a lot. Since we were 18 years old, we've known each other. She saw me struggling on my very first ones and trying to do it.

[00:29:19.530] - Speaker 1
It's always been a fun process for us when all the potential is left in the song. It's just the beginning.

[00:29:25.640] - Speaker 2
Yeah, it's so cool that you found this partner in life and in work and in everything. It's beautiful.

[00:29:33.660] - Speaker 1
No, I was really lucky. I mean, both of us were lucky. We've been partners through it all.

[00:29:37.500] - Speaker 2
Do you write songs with the idea of I'm writing songs because I'm going to make an album, or do you write songs just because you write songs?

[00:29:45.190] - Speaker 1
I think just the right songs, but I think it would also be foolish to not identify that I know that there's that potential. But I do like to convince myself, and I think I'm pretty good at doing it, that I might I may not do another album. And I won't do another album until I know I have enough songs that feel like an album, and then I'll start thinking about the side of actually putting it out. I've been lucky since the very first album, I had somebody give me the advice of just sign a one-record deal. And back then, I remember thinking, why? It seems like I'd want to make a lot of these things, right? And they were really adamant that that was the one thing they wanted me to do. And so I got lucky because that ended up being a really good thing in my case, because we've always I've done one record deals through the whole thing, and mostly for that thing of not feeling like I need to write for an upcoming album. Every time I've finished, I've told myself, That might be the last one. It's not a dramatic thing.

[00:30:43.810] - Speaker 1
It's just like, I'm only I want to make one if I have enough stuff around it.

[00:30:46.520] - Speaker 2
The beauty of that is you don't feel any pressure.Yeah.

[00:30:49.420] - Speaker 1
No pressure.Which.

[00:30:49.950] - Speaker 2
Allows the work to be that much better. If you're under the gun, you're going to make concessions that you wouldn't make if you're free.

[00:30:57.010] - Speaker 1
Yeah, definitely. I do need to set a deadline at at some point, but it's only when I know there's enough potential and all these ideas that I've made a list of.

[00:31:06.770] - Speaker 2
And I know that there's-Yeah, there's something that you already know there's an album in there. There's an album in there. You just have to refine it and finish it.

[00:31:13.690] - Speaker 1
But I won't finish it until I say, Okay, the album is going to come out on this day, and then we go backwards. Okay, that means I got to turn in the mix as this one. This is usually like two years or a year before. And so I'll know, Okay, we're going to record in the fall. And we usually record for off and on, we'll do a few weeks and take a break in a few weeks. It might take two months for the recording process, but I still will give myself another month if I don't like anything we did that we could go back in and start over. I'll do all that backtracking, but I need all those ideas to be able to commit to that deadline.

[00:31:48.740] - Speaker 2
Over the course of eight or nine albums, how much has the recording process changed?

[00:31:54.290] - Speaker 1
Not a whole lot. I still record in my garage. The very first album, we did at a place called Grandmaster in LA. I did it with J. P. Plunier, who was working with Ben Harper, and he was his manager and producer at the time. And J. P. Was a fan of our surf movies, so he used to come in there and sit in the editing bay with us. My friend Emmet Malloy, who co-manages me, my wife and my friend Emmet are my managers. And back then, I didn't need a manager. He was just my friend. And he's a surf filmmaker as well. Yeah. So he was the editor on the films. I was the cinematographer and our friend Chris Malloy on Thicker Than Water. He was basically the main producer. He got the trips together, got the surfers, figured out how we were going to do it all. I would load the camera for him sometimes, too, and he would get some great water shots as well. So we made those Thicker Than daughter in September sessions I made with Kelly Slater as one of the producers, pulling it together. And Emmett, again, was the editor.

[00:32:53.210] - Speaker 1
So Emmett handed JP a cassette tape. He was managing for me back then. He was just an ambitious friend that saw the potential on it all. When I say potential, I just mean that he liked sharing my stuff. He was always sweet about being, Have you heard this? It's really cool. He would pass it along. So JP heard it, and he actually called me and said, Hey, I think you could actually make an album. He was one of the first people that even put that idea of, really, this could be more than just my four track recordings. I hadn't really even thought about it. And so I got to go in the studio. I think we went in for six days for the first album and recorded for six days and then mixed for another week or something, and it was done. That was the only record I did that wasn't in my garage. That album went crazy for us compared to what I thought it was going to do, it ended up being a big album.

[00:33:48.540] - Speaker 2
Had you really been playing live before recording that album?

[00:33:51.180] - Speaker 1
I've been playing live, but just in a few clubs between San Diego and Santa Barbara. It was called the in LA. We used to play there. It was the one spot we'd come back to. During that time, it started getting more and more crowded. At first, it was mostly Emmett's family. He had so much family in LA, and he would just bring them all down. And I think when people would show up, they'd feel like, Oh, this is happening. Look all these people. So we had that little lucky thing happen. And so then at some point, that started selling out. And that was around the same time. We had one song off of our surf film called F-Stop Blues that I had written. It became like a song a surfer started knowing from the surf film. And it was funny to think it was a real slow, peaceful song. But that was the most requested song at our shows at first because they didn't know any other ones. So I guess before we went on tour with Ben Harper, when the first album came out and then Ben invited us to I went on tour with him, I had only played small little clubs between Santa Barbara and San Diego.

[00:34:51.520] - Speaker 1
And I remember telling Ben, I don't think I'm really ready to do a real tour. And he was so sweet. He's always been like an older brother who was like, Nobody's ever ready. And the thing is, I get to choose, and you're like, Let's do this. It can be fun, man. And so he brought me out, and I can remember being so nervous. I felt like I was going to pass out before I'd walk on stage for those first shows. But he was always so... His audience was amazing. I got really lucky because he had real. An audience who was really listening to music and really thoughtful and kind. Even the first shows, there was a lot of people there. It wasn't packed. And then it was the beginning of when people could communicate on the internet, too. I think it was mostly on a website, they'd go to a chat room, people could talk. But somehow during that first tour with Ben, people started saying, You should show up early enough to check the opening act. And by the end of the tour, starting to be pretty much full by the time we'd play.

[00:35:42.600] - Speaker 1
And what I thought was just going to be one summer getting open for Ben Harper. By the end of it, there was people that started putting themselves in place and offering to be, Hey, I could be your booking agent, this thing. And it all just fell in real easy. It was a lot of work. And It's a fine line between how to explain it in the sense of I felt like every step of the way just kept moving forward in a really easy way. But there was a lot of half-four clubs in the beginning, and there was a lot of driving ourselves through the night, having to decide, We were really going to go for this. It was a mixture of following this natural wave, but also working really hard and showing up in every town and doing an in-store and visiting the radio station and doing all these things in the day. But that all seemed really nice to me. It felt like a way of the in-store is you could play music with just the acoustic guitar and have all these people that already had the albums come down and get to meet.

[00:36:39.910] - Speaker 1
It was really fun at that stage just to get to meet all these people that were into the music. It was an exciting time, but a lot of work. I didn't have kids at the time, so I didn't mind it at all. It was fun.

[00:36:52.750] - Speaker 2
How did you meet Ben?

[00:36:54.070] - Speaker 1
Ben was through JP, who was a fan of our surf films. Then JP He invited me to a show, and I got to meet Ben backstage. And then that first time I had met him, as we first met, he sang the melody to one of my songs. He had been listening to the music earlier in the day, and it blew my mind. I was such a fan of his music. And the fact that he had heard it and remembered the melody, and he ended up playing Sly guitar on that song. He came into the studio and laid it down. But it took me a long time to get past being a fan of Ben. Now, when we see each other, it's like an old friend. It's But truly, all the things he's done for me, I feel like he's an older brother because he's done so much for me, and he's been so sweet through the whole thing. But at the time, I was just like, every time I'd see him, I'd be star struck for a while. It took me a minute to get past it. But that was the first tour I ever did.

[00:37:45.450] - Speaker 1
And I got to see before they'd go on stage as a band, they'd come together and they would talk about how much they appreciated that people had come to the show and that they were getting to play music for people that night and that they hoped they'd all get home safe. There was times I'd be a band in the show to be over. And this one time, in particular, I remember he said, Hey, come with me. We're going to go to this kid's house. And he had gotten a letter about this kid who got hit by a car and couldn't come to the show, and he was in a body cast. And it was midnight. It was after the show was over, he went to this his house, and Ben went and played a little concert for the kid. This is before everybody had phones and that stuff. It wasn't like he went to do it and then put it on social media. Nobody ever even knew about it, except for the five people that were with him watching. And it was just seeing the way The relationship he had with his fans was really cool.

[00:38:33.810] - Speaker 1
That was a nice blueprint for me to be on my very first experience with how to do it.

[00:38:37.950] - Speaker 2
You talk about Ben's ritual before going on stage of getting together with the band, and it sounds like setting an intention for the show and being grateful. Do you have any rituals that you practice in life?

[00:38:52.940] - Speaker 1
A big hug. It's like the one thing our band always does, we all hug each other right before we're gone. One hug each. It's really funny. It's like We've been together for 23 years now as a band, I guess. Same guys, I'm lucky. There's three other guys in the band. The drummer was the first one, and we used to do gigs like an acoustic white Stripe. It was just acoustic guitar and drums in the little clubs, and then the bass player came. Then the piano player was an old college friend that we used to be in bands together before I ever really had a shot at doing the music thing back in college. But then he joined the band a few albums on the keyboards. And so, yeah, it's just mostly given a big hug before we go on stage and just have fun out there thing to each other. It's nothing very intense, but we can't go on without all given a quick embrace. It just happens everybody goes around, hugs each other, and then we go on. Because if the day has been busy, and this is the first time we're seeing each other, which is usually not the case, but there are days where it's like, Hey, let's not soundcheck today because we're in this beautiful spot.

[00:39:57.250] - Speaker 1
Monitors will be fine. Let's just go up there and we'll tweak them on the first couple songs, and everybody wants to go spend time with friends or family. And so sometimes we won't see each other until right when we're about to walk on. But usually, we have a little backstage room. 90% of the time, we go back and jam for about an hour before we go on. We're really lucky because the crew is the same thing. Our crew has been the same people. The guy who mixes my sound, he used to mix it when the clubs were half full. He's been with us the whole time. So he still has the right to be like, Oh, man, you guys suck tonight. And he knows it. We'll all have a laugh and be like, Yeah, I know. Or he a lot of times tells us, Hey, that was one of the most beautiful ones I've seen. You guys did great. He's a sweetheart. But he's like a Hans solo character. He's the reluctant hero. But the crew is really sweet because they always set us up a backstage room. We don't always soundcheck. We're not a real loud band, and we have a lot of fun sometimes.

[00:40:50.360] - Speaker 1
When the mix is a little different, it helps. But then I can just quickly look over and we have those signals about guitar down or voice up and piano up and that stuff. We can make those changes in the first song or two, and it's fine. In that way, you don't got to be to the venue in the afternoon. You get to spend the day out in the place you're at. It's funny how many times it'll be where people will meet that day, then I'll see in the front. So cool. They'll have requested a song, and I can put it in the set. We'll have time to go learn it and stuff. So I guess the only real ritual we have is a little jam before we go on, usually. And I always tell my kids, my kids travel with us and stuff, and they get to see the whole thing go down, and they love music. And I'm glad they get to see that. I always tell them, Hey, the best part of the day is the jam. The shows sometimes go great. Sometimes you just got to get through them because they're not, for whatever reason, every night can't be the best.

[00:41:40.580] - Speaker 1
But it's like, the jam is always good. We always get to have fun in there. Sometimes the kids will jump on with us and play something. They get to see the crowds come in and all that. That part of it is just a byproduct of getting to do something that you love.

[00:41:57.360] - Speaker 2
How different are the shows from Night to Night for What do you do?

[00:42:01.760] - Speaker 1
There can be times, there can be a little Groundhogs Day, if we got four shows in a row. But in general, I'm really lucky because the guys in the band, being that they're really good friends, we got a lot of inside jokes. Somebody will just do one little thing, make a gesture on the piano that we know. I'll look over at him, he'll be smiling at me, and he'll be trying to wake me up sometimes. And then the piano player, he sings a lot. Everybody in the band sings, and we'll do harmonies and stuff, but the piano player does most of the harmonies, and he'll take the lead on a few spots. We've known each other since we were 18 years old, born on the same day in 1975. His name is Zack. My name is Jack. He knows me almost better than anybody, where he can see when I need help carrying the show, and he'll step it up a notch for me. Or he'll do something to make me laugh. There was one show that was so quiet. And quiet can be good when you want to play the quiet songs, but we were trying I would put on more of an upbeat set, and this crowd just wouldn't do anything.

[00:43:04.350] - Speaker 1
It was so quiet, you could hear a pin drop. At some point, it was so quiet that no matter what somebody said, you could hear it. And somebody said, I want your babies in the front row. I said, I'm not going to give them to you. I'm glad you think it's funny. Nobody else in the crowd even laughed. But Zack, over on the piano, he goes, Man, it's real rumpled, stillskin vibe around here because stealing the babies and stuff. The next two or three songs, I couldn't stop laughing. I couldn't even get my lyrics out because I thought it was the funniest thing I ever heard. Part of the funniest thing is in class, when you get the giggles with your friend, and nobody else thinks what you think is funny, but you can't stop laughing. And the awkwardness that you're the only two that think it's funny. So we have that sometimes.

[00:43:47.820] - Speaker 2
And you're on stage. Yeah, we're on stage.

[00:43:50.100] - Speaker 1
But looking back, it's like-That must amplify it, I imagine. It's one of the shows we talk about the most. So anyways, I'm lucky to have guys like that in a band that if it's the best show I ever have, I feel lucky to share it with close friends that we get to talk about all the time. But if it's the worst show I ever have, I also feel lucky that it's friends that we had this experience. It's like, Oh, man, can you remember that one or this one or the other? That time this happened? To get to share that with friends, I feel really lucky for that.

[00:44:15.480] - Speaker 2
How different are the audiences in different parts of the world?

[00:44:19.450] - Speaker 1
I used to think more, and I used to put that on the audience, but now I realize we can do a lot. Sometimes it's signals we send that allow people or give them the chance to to get up and dance or those things. Sometimes you're in a seated venue and everybody's sitting, and they don't want to block the person in front of them. Sometimes if you say, Hey, either way, but if you want to dance, I'm giving you permission. Everybody get up and dance. Other nights, you'll do that, and a couple of people will, and you realize, Okay, let's change the set. It's more of an acoustic night. People just want to chill and listen to lyrics. We've learned to read crowds better, but I guess it can be sometimes places where I remember the show being one way, we get back there and it's opposite. It's like the group of individuals that are there that night make the show up, really.

[00:45:02.000] - Speaker 2
Is it really different, would you say, from night to night? Just the nature of how the crowd reacts?

[00:45:06.500] - Speaker 1
Yes and no. If we're playing, we do a lot of outside amphitheaters. If there's a standing pit in the front and then a seated area and a lawn in the back, those can feel pretty similar because you got your dancing crew up front, and then you can... Sometimes you'll start noticing, are people sitting or are they standing in the next one? It helps us gage which way to go on the set. But Brazil is always Off like crazy. Brazil is always really fun. And now we know going in there, it's like you put on a party set and it's like they're going to sing along with you. They're going to start singing the melodies. Even when you're not singing words, they'll start singing the melody lines and stuff. So you can always guarantee Brazil is going to be nuts. It's so fun. We love playing there.

[00:45:50.180] - Speaker 2
What was the first music growing up that was your music, not your older brother's music or not your parents' music, where you felt like, This is mine? Yeah.

[00:45:59.270] - Speaker 1
Fugazi. I remember drivingFugazi is incredible. Just incredible. I mean, literally, I was driving to school and we used to get a radio station on our side of the island. There was two, I think, back then. We'd have K2H, which was the college station. Then there was 'Reel Free, Hawaii' for a while. And I forget which one of those two it was on, but I was driving to school, and there was this one zone where the radio would cut out and it was coming up. But when waiting room came on the radio, and the first time I heard that song, I pulled the car over because I didn't want to get to this zone where the radio would cut out. And I had sat there and I made sure to listen until they said... Because I couldn't believe the sound I was hearing. It was at that moment that I knew I had to go home and make a band. It was like hearing waiting room. And we were all playing. Me and my best friend, we were playing the two of us. We'd sit around and show each other Jimmy Hendrix songs and little licks in my bedroom.

[00:46:54.100] - Speaker 1
But it was just two guitars. And he was in the car with me and we were listening. We were like, All right, who could play drums? From there, the rest of the car ride was like, do we know any bass players? And sure enough, a week later, we had a band. It was one guy we just made play drums. He was trying to learn guitar, too. We were like, sorry, your drums, because we already got two guitar players. And then we had a guy who wanted to play bass, so we got lucky. We had pretty much a... Fugazi is what got us into it, but then we got really in a minor threat because we realized it was easier to sound like minor threat. We could learn those songs quicker. Fugazi was a little complex for us still, but it was something to aspire to be. But it was something to aspire to be... But the Minor Threat, we were pretty much a Minor Threat cover band. Then we started writing a few originals. Mostly, it was the guy singing. We'd all sing backups, but it was a lot of fun. We would practice a lot more than we'd actually play gigs.

[00:47:45.980] - Speaker 1
I think we played four backyards on graduation and stuff. But that was it. Just that feeling of getting together with the gang and being in a garage and making music. It was everything. But Fugazi, yeah, Fugazi is the one, though.Incredible.The thing that I was so lucky about stumbling on that band. It was this energy of friends making music and something that a teenager could do and what you wanted to rock on a guitar. But then the lyrics, hearing those lyrics of You are not what you own and those things at that age. It really informed my songwriting as I started trying to write songs. Even though I started getting into other stuff, and it wasn't like I was only listening to punk. It was part of what I liked, but I love listening and Cat Stevens, and I would sit in my room and try to learn Beatles songs and things like that. But together with the friends, it was that energy. It was punk rock, but we were all wearing board shorts and slippers still. It was really funny. Little scene in Hawaii.

[00:48:43.640] - Speaker 2
That punk rock ethos Ethos, do it yourself ethos. It seems like your band has had that the whole time as well. You're in the music industry, but you're not really part of it.

[00:48:53.500] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I've gotten lucky with that. I think big part of that is the partnership with my wife, and as things would come along, she was always really good at somewhere like the early contracts and stuff because I didn't want to think about that stuff, as most artists don't. I was lucky to have somebody who could at least look at it and she would read through and be like, I don't know. If somebody's going to give you that much money up front, they're also going to want a lot from you. We always had this thing. Like you said, it was really easier to have a partner, somebody to sit around or take a long walk with and discuss it. We We were really happy. It wasn't like we had a dream of what we wanted to be. We already had happiness in our little apartments, wherever we were living. We would be like, Hey, we don't want much more than this, but if we can make this, keep going. This is pretty cool. We had this thing of not needing the big advances and stuff, but just needing control. So it was really just a thing of flipping all that and being like, All right, we don't need that, but here's what we do want.

[00:49:56.910] - Speaker 1
And we would just write in that one record deal. You don't get to see anything until it's done. You don't get to hear anything until it's done. Unfortunately, you do need to plan ahead and think of that stuff, because if you don't, you might like the idea of all that stuff, but contractually, you're held to do these other things. Somebody can come in the studio and say, Oh, I don't like that. Change this. We never had any of that. We just always had control of it all. Even though it grew to be bigger than I ever thought it would, we maintained that control and the ability to scrap everything if I wasn't in the That's the direction.

[00:50:30.470] - Speaker 2
Great. And the same with band members, the same with the crew. It always feels like you have your own thing.

[00:50:36.140] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I appreciate that.

[00:50:37.530] - Speaker 2
It feels more homemade. Yeah.

[00:50:41.290] - Speaker 1
I think it is. When my wife, my best friend or my manager, all the choices are always more like what's best for our family and our friendships and things like that. And it's success. It's fun when it goes well. We always used to think about planting a little garden, and it's like you plant a seed and you see if it you grow and you water a little bit, you go play an in-store, you visit a radio station, you see if you can go back and play a bigger club in that town. Those things were fun. I think sometimes people get turned off from thinking like, Oh, I don't want to think of any of the business stuff. But for us, it was all the homemade thing made the business fun. We started our own little record label on the second album on, and we were able to look at the business more as a garden and just seeing if it could grow things and how it work. So it was always a lot of fun. And just getting to surround ourselves with friends. The personalities always had to work on tour, the band, all those things, people bringing their own families around and just making a feel homemade.

[00:51:43.680] - Speaker 1
It was always really important to us.

[00:51:46.310] - Speaker 2
You said earlier, when you start a song, you don't know where it comes from, and then there'll be something that you like. Tell me more about that.

[00:51:54.790] - Speaker 1
Trying to think of an example. I had this... Sometimes it's just the melody. And then I'll start filling those in. And a lot of times, it'll be when I'll start a song with no intention of it being a real song. I have a song on my newest album called Don't Look Now, and I ended up liking it quite a bit. But in the beginning, it was one of those joke songs. My son every day would talk about there's a rooster and it's living in this tree right outside his bedroom, and I'd wake him up really early. And so at breakfast, before he'd be leaving for school, we'd be sitting there and he'd say, Hey, dad, think you could give me a gun? And I'll be like, I'm not going to get you a gun. And he'd be like, All right, well, I got to find a slingshot. I got to kill this rooster. And I told him, I was like, That's up to you. But he's like, If you kill it, you're going to have to deal with the killing you done. You got to deal with the body and everything. It became this funny thing where we were talking about this rooster, and I don't know if he really wanted to kill it because he seemed pretty pissed.

[00:52:57.670] - Speaker 1
Every morning, he was waking up really early. So he was probably I was really thinking about killing it. Then I started thinking about what it means to kill something, even though I was joking with my kid. I was sitting around later and I had this song, and it was like, I know that every morning my son says someday I'm going to kill that rooster with a The gun that you won't give me. If you kill it, you're going to have to deal with the killing you done. That was the original idea, and I remember the melody.

[00:53:22.730] - Speaker 2
Good words, though.

[00:53:24.030] - Speaker 1
Yeah. But those words never made it in the song.

[00:53:26.540] - Speaker 2
Yeah, but great.

[00:53:27.800] - Speaker 1
Oh, yeah, thanks.

[00:53:28.550] - Speaker 2
Great phrasing, too.

[00:53:29.600] - Speaker 1
I do that live. Now, sometimes when we play that song, I'll just sing that line and it's live. It's fine.

[00:53:34.740] - Speaker 2
Would you say music usually comes before lyrics for you?

[00:53:39.930] - Speaker 1
Usually. I'd say usually, but there's a lot of times that I'll have a line or two I'll write down somewhere or that'll be around in my mind, and then I'll try them with melodies. Those sometimes come independent, and then I'll think they're good and I'll try them. And sometimes they work, sometimes they don't. It's so much to me about when the melody and the sentiment of the lyrics meet and the chord changes underneath it. I love the idea of poetry. I've never felt like what I write is poetry. It doesn't work for me until I hear the combination of the chord change in the melody and the lyrics together. But I do write a lot. I'll write things, but I never can read it as a poem and then feel like it doesn't work on its own. It's like I've always thought of it melodically. I heard Last Thoughts on Woody Guthrie by Bob Dylan when I was a teenager, and It's a poem he reads out loud at a live concert. It's really sweet. He talks about how they asked him to write a few words about what Woody Guthrie meant to him as Woody Guthrie was dying.

[00:54:41.630] - Speaker 1
He said he couldn't just write a few, so he wrote seven pages, and he's like, I'd like to read it. Now he reads it. It's so good the way it stumbles on itself and the lines. You can't tell where the beginnings and the ends are. I just love the way that sounded. A lot of times I'll write things that almost feel like that to me, and then I'll try them with music later. But his is really good. It's when your head gets twisted or your mind grows numb, you think you're too old, too young, too smart, too dumb. You're lagging behind, you're losing your pace in the slow motion crawl of life's busy race. It's just the way it goes on for five, seven minutes. It's so good. It's all about hope. Where do you find hope? Then he gives a page or two on where you're not going to find hope. And then he starts discussing where you can find hope and how it's different for everyone. Anyways, that was really, I I think important for me to hear when I was about 16 of just the lyrical flow. It gave me the idea of how to not let the one of the measure be, you don't have to end there.

[00:55:39.220] - Speaker 1
It could carry over.

[00:55:41.940] - Speaker 2
You freed up your phrasing.

[00:55:43.570] - Speaker 1
Yeah, freed up your phrasing quite a bit.

[00:55:44.570] - Speaker 2
Get the point across.

[00:55:46.500] - Speaker 1
Yeah, a lot of hip hop stuff, too. I love the flow of Most Def and different people that I think later I started hearing that in a lot of hip hop. But when I was 16, that Dylan song really was it me.

[00:56:04.020] - Speaker 2
How does it work? You write a new batch of songs. Do you get together in a rehe before going into the studio?

[00:56:09.940] - Speaker 1
So the last two albums, I've started on my own, built the tracks. Then some of those I played everything on them, and then some I'll have the band come back in. The first seven albums we did as a band, and so exactly what you said, I'd start writing We start playing. Sometimes I wouldn't be done with lyrics, but we start getting a sound together as a band, and I'd get recordings, sometimes even finish a third verse once we had a recording. Now, the last few albums, I've approached them a little different, partly dances. During the last few years, there was a few times where Blake Mills and I got together, and it was just the only people we'd see were each other and my family, and be pretty isolated during the whole pandemic. It was We were still being able to make music and work on things. Then some of the tracks, I liked them just how they were. Other ones, I had the band come in and we redid parts. It could be any different way, but I've done a lot of... Blake and I, Blake Mills and I, on this last album, started every song just facing each other.

[00:57:19.970] - Speaker 1
A lot of times it'd be as I was teaching him the song or the cord changes, and sometimes he'd give me an idea of like, I'll try this instead. But as we were rehearsing it through, we'd be recording and then sometimes it's that take where it's the first one that he's learned it, but not too well yet that we would end up keeping. But we'd be committed to those two guitars because we'd be three feet apart from each other. We'd have a microphone towards both of us, but the bleed between the two, there might be one song on the more we'd turned his mic off, but you could still hear the ghost of it. But in general, we would start with those two guitars, see if that was enough and then build from there. Sometimes we'd just go in and we would then play a percussion track. We'd find that we were racing to the instruments. And I feel like Blake and I, it was a little learning curve at first. We didn't know each other before we started. We decided to spend a week together and just see if we liked it before we even told anybody else.

[00:58:23.230] - Speaker 1
Again, my manager stuff, my best friend's my wife, so they all knew. But we didn't talk about any a record or or something like that. We just said, Let's get together for a week and see what happens. I think we both admit that we weren't sure after the first week. Then we went home, not because we didn't like each other as people, but I think both of us had a pretty strong idea of how we do things. We both had to bend a little bit. He had a thing of never making a rough mix at the end of the day to listen to because he didn't want people to hear it before it was ready. I have a thing where every day I want a rough mix. And when I'm having dinner with the family or friends over for barbecue, I put it on and I'll tell everybody, Hey, these are all such close friends. They don't care about my music. These are guys I grew up with. And I'll just say, Hey, I'm putting this on for me. Don't feel like you got to listen to it. This is just so I know if it works or not in this setting.

[00:59:17.090] - Speaker 1
And I'm used to that. And Blake's used to being like, No, don't make rough mixes too early. Take a break from it. Both are totally valid. They're both ways to work. We had to learn when was the right time to bend to each other. And so the Same way on the instruments, it'd be funny. It'd be like, Oh, I got this idea for the drums. I'd run over the drum set, and then he'd be like, Hold on, what about this? I think in the very beginning, the ego was getting in the way of being like, I'd have an idea for the bass. He'd have an idea. Then slowly, we started being able, and I can remember times where both of us did it of being like, Your idea is better. I like that. Let's go with that. Once we got to that point where we knew both of us wanted to make the best record we could and just really listen to the ideas, don't come into it thinking this is mine or that's yours. It was great. Then I loved working with them. We have a great relationship and keep in touch now. It was a lot of fun.

[01:00:08.840] - Speaker 1
But that's how we built this one, was just the two of us on guitars and then slowly building percussion or if it needed bass or keys.

[01:00:15.890] - Speaker 2
Would those have vocals at that time or not? You would do them as instrumentals and then overdub vocals?

[01:00:20.800] - Speaker 1
Usually as instrumentals or I'd whisper, so he knew where we were in a song. Then lots of different way. You know all those different tricks that you could do. It's like sometimes you need a scratch track. Sometimes I would even do one real quiet and just a vocal track that we could play to. We did lots of different approaches. But I'd say most often we got the guitars, how we liked them with me, lift my eyebrows when the change was about to come, and then built off of those. It was so nice, though. I guess a lot of times...Click.

[01:00:52.570] - Speaker 2
Or no click?No.

[01:00:53.320] - Speaker 1
Click on this album. We generally haven't done much to click. I think on our second and third album with Mario, we did some click. That was always a learning curve. There were songs where I can still hear the click when I listen to it now, where it was holding us back. We wanted to push, and I can hear the click pulling us on a few songs. But I don't know if everybody hears it. There's songs that actually are bigger songs for us sometimes, but I feel like that's not our best version. Now we do a lot better live, I feel like. In general, I don't like the click too much. Especially once, Blake was great about... He didn't if a chorus sped up a few BPMs and things like that.

[01:01:33.830] - Speaker 2
Well, it just sounds good.Yeah, exactly.Whatever sounds good is good.

[01:01:37.080] - Speaker 1
There was something really nice, though, about having his... We had talked about it before, but he's just an amazing guitar player I was one of the things I actually was curious to hear his production ideas, but I knew I loved his guitar playing, and I really just wanted to sit around and get to play music with him and learn his approach to guitar. That was my favorite thing is when I would show him a song and then The way he can shred and all that stuff, he's like somebody who if he wants to, he can just stand out on top. But he has this really supportive way of playing on this album with me where he would give these slight harmony parts to my guitar, and he would just make it feel more musical as we were recording it. There are times where you're recording the song and you have to imagine in your mind the drum part and the bass. If you're building it in parts and you're not doing it live and starting with guitar, then it could feel a little lonely on that first track you're doing. Something about starting together with the two guitars, it always just felt like music.

[01:02:35.610] - Speaker 2
It already sounds like a record.

[01:02:37.720] - Speaker 1
Yeah, exactly.

[01:02:40.130] - Speaker 2
I remember the first time I heard Blake, I didn't know who he was. I heard someone was playing me a cover song that someone did for some project, and then the guitar solo came, and we hear guitar solos all the time. I remember stopping and it's like, Who is that? It wasn't even like a look at me guitar solo came.It was just like the feeling in it was so powerful. Who played that? It's like, Oh, it's this kid, Blake Mills. It was a long time ago. He was a little kid then.

[01:03:10.220] - Speaker 1
The thing that's so rad about it is that almost every time he changed it, too, He's done things where I'll tell my friends, Check this out. Hey, let's play a song. Then he won't do the same thing again. I'll get frustrated at first because I'll be like, No, remember that thing you're doing where you're making it sound like a shooting star? But if I open my mind, listen to a new thing he's doing, it's like, Oh, now you're finding something totally new in it again. He's sat in with us live a few times, and he's never repeated what he does. But every time the band's like, Oh, my God, what do you just do? Again, it's like those magic trick moments. I know it's for him just having to talk to him enough that he listens to guitar players, but not a whole lot. He loves other instruments from around the world. It's something I've heard Hendrix talk about, is trying to make his guitar sound like other instruments.

[01:03:55.990] - Speaker 2
Keith Richards as well talks about most of the greats of people who've...

[01:03:59.370] - Speaker 1
Like, horn a Yeah, they'd invented a whole new sound. It's because they're using the guitar as an instrument to be able to try to interpret something else they're hearing. That's how Blake is. He's like, It's so much fun to play with him.

[01:04:12.310] - Speaker 2
You mentioned endless summer before. Is it possible to live an endless summer life? In other words, can you spend the whole year traveling around the world, going to the best surf spots? Is there always good surf somewhere?

[01:04:27.460] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I know guys that do that, too. Well, Kelly Slater would be a good example. He hasn't lived in one spot since he was a teenager. He's just constantly following good waves, and that's his whole thing. So it can be done. It's just because the storm patterns change around the world, and there's always somewhere great and warm. Definitely a lot of the pro tour, I guess, does that, too. They're following the waves where they're good, so it can be done.

[01:04:53.960] - Speaker 2
Where have you surfed in Indonesia?

[01:04:56.770] - Speaker 1
I've surfed all around Sumatra and just Java and Bali, a lot of different islands all around.

[01:05:06.030] - Speaker 2
How did those islands compare to Hawaii? I've never been to Indonesia.

[01:05:11.610] - Speaker 1
It's hard to put into words, but they definitely have their own personalities. What happens with a wave a lot of times is how the water draws off of the reef. Sometimes you'll see in Tahiti, that really exaggerated version where you can see the wave going below sea level off the reef. It's pulling off and it It has to do with how fast the wave is traveling when it hits the reef. Generally, that happens when you're coming from really deep water to really shallow, really quick. Whereas somewhere like California, it comes from deep to shallow really gradually. It's like a big long incline. So the friction of the bottom of the ocean is slowing that wave down. So by the time the wave breaks, it just crumbles over instead of throwing over like it does in Indonesia or Tahiti is the place where you see it the most. Hawaii is probably a little heavier most of the time, but you can find the heavy waves everywhere. But Indonesia is real perfect. I guess surfers are trying to find the tube, the barrel in that real hollow wave. It's a more playful version than, say, Tahiti or Hawaii, which gets real heavy, a lot of energy in the waves.

[01:06:19.990] - Speaker 1
Indonesia is really the water can be so glassy. Hawaii has trade winds, but most of the time the wind's blowing side offshore, and it creates that really magnificent spray off the wave that you see. Whereas Indonesia, it's less wind and really glassy surface. Each wave has its own personality. Surfers that surf the same wave, you get really used to that personality of that wave, and you learn that wave. And that's why you get some surfers that never change spots. They just surf their spot every day. It's a luxury to get to travel around and get to try and experience different personalities of waves.

[01:06:54.910] - Speaker 2
Is the goal eventually to get closer and the same wave, or is it more fun to experience different places in different waves?

[01:07:05.040] - Speaker 1
I think a little of each. There's also like when you surf a spot, often, you know the people out there, and there's that aspect, too. You know where you are in the lineup and which spots are more friendly, which spots are more territorial. There's so many things that go into it. I think everybody's goal is probably different. I think when you're a kid, you're improving every day, you have certain goals. Then when you hit a level where maintaining is the goal, maintaining your health, maintaining what you can do on a wave. Then maybe at some age, just being able to stand up is the goal, getting to your feet. I can remember my dad and his friends at one barbecue when they were getting older, sharing tips on how to still get to your feet. Some of them were just going out and just riding a wave on their belly at that point. They were getting too old. It was like that was the hardest part was getting up to the feet. And so, yeah, surfing, it can be lots of different goals, I think.

[01:08:00.020] - Speaker 2
What's the surfer who had the Five Sons who were all surfers, did a movie where they traveled around in a bus?Oh.

[01:08:05.980] - Speaker 1
The Pasquitz, maybe?Pasquitz, yeah.

[01:08:07.730] - Speaker 2
I remember towards the end, he would surf on his knees when he really got older. I remember that.

[01:08:14.780] - Speaker 1
Yeah, as long as you can ride. Really, it's just being in the ocean, too. I'll get somewhere on tour where there's no waves and just touching the source again, getting in the ocean. I remember, I won't get the quote right, but I remember something that I thought was moving, and I wanted to ask what you meant by it because it struck something in me. But when you stand looking at the ocean, you'll see a clearer reflection of yourself than in front of a mirror.

[01:08:39.350] - Speaker 2
It's something about the vast impenetrability of the ocean, we see the beauty of life, the beauty of the life force on the planet. We're part of that, and that's closer to us than anything else. It's mysterious in the way that we are with ourselves. It's impossible to know what's going on inside of ourselves.

[01:09:05.670] - Speaker 1
Yeah, it's so true. It really struck me because a lot of times I'll be brushing my teeth or something, and I'll get a glance, and I don't tend to want to stand there and just look in the mirror. I'll just think like, That's funny. There he is. I'll usually walk out, brush my teeth somewhere else, and I'll come back. Mirrors are funny. I like what Kurt Vonnegut talks about them. They call them leaks in one of his books, where it's like a leak to another dimension. But It struck me with what you're talking about because the ocean could be so humbling, too. It's like it's so vast. When the waves get more powerful and you get out there and it's just you and the ocean. I think that's so true. You really learn yourself Whether you're staring at it or in it. I like that saying. It had a lot of mystery to me, too, what you said, that quote. I have a song called Only the Ocean. It's about my dad and it's about him and the thing I would see where he was at peace when he'd be in the ocean. The first verse is about him, I think.

[01:10:05.700] - Speaker 1
But let's say it's an older song. And the first chorus says, It's only the ocean in you. And then the second chorus, It's only the ocean in me. It's about passing of time also.Beautiful. When you find the father in yourself and those things. It has that idea we talked about earlier when you look around an Only Horizon. I think it's in this song.

[01:10:25.360] - Speaker 2
What I take away from that is that anything we put on it is the story we put on it. But if you take the story away, it's just rolling. Yeah.

[01:10:37.220] - Speaker 1
That whole album was my dad had just passed away. So a lot of those songs were me processing. Then we had just returned them to the ocean, his ashes. And so, yeah, that was the last song on the album. But it was a lot of the metaphors and thoughts on the album had to do with water in different ways. I'd read Iron John.Robert Bligh.Robert Bligh, yeah, recently, and it was good timing for me. And just a lot of the metaphors in that book really resonated with me at the time.

[01:11:12.000] - Speaker 2
There seemed to have always been a connection between music and surfing from Dick Dale and the Beach Boys. There always seems to be some connection there. Why do you think that is?

[01:11:23.870] - Speaker 1
I don't know. I can tell you my experience of the connection is going back to when we'd I'd watch surf films. And a lot of times it was us just getting excited for surfing. When it became when we have VHSs, you could pop them in after school and we could watch. We'd usually just fast forward to a part that we wanted to see and we'd watch maybe 10 minutes. For me, it was Tom Curran. That was it. Most of my friends, unless... If you were a regular foot, you wanted to be Tom Curran. If you were a goofy foot, you wanted to be Mark Ocalupo. We'd watch those parts, and then we'd go surf. As we were surfing, And you would have that in your mind. There was a song by the Untouchables. Wild Child, it was called. And Mark Ocalupo, I think, that's maybe the first Ariel I'd I've never seen in a movie, and he barely gets out off the wave, but he pulls it off. We'd go out surfing, and that song would be in my head. And not just in your mind, but as I would take off on the wave, I would be.

[01:12:29.060] - Speaker 2
It's almost like the music music was related to that trick.

[01:12:32.780] - Speaker 1
Yeah, the music was related to that trick, or the music was related to just the feeling you got when you watched that person surf, and it made you feel like you were doing things that you probably weren't doing. We were probably just wiggling down the line, but in our mind, we were doing aerials. In our mind, we were doing these roundhouse cutbacks that we'd see Karen doing. It was like an escape. When you just said that, it reminded me, too. It's like a lot of times for me, the first place I hear a song, where I am is when I hear that song and I think of that experience or that place. That might be the meaning for the song. The song might be for the writer, something totally different. But for me, it might be where I was in a van with my wife on a road trip listening, and I picture those same things I'm seeing. Even though if I really listen to the lyrics, it might be about something else. It's like the meaning is in that road trip we were on. It becomes its own thing. It's, I guess, not too different with the surfing.

[01:13:29.640] - Speaker 1
It's I have no idea what the songs were meaning. I just like, no, the feel was helping me find the rhythm on the wave. There is a certain rhythm, but you can't put it to a meter because as the wave changed, you need to change your rhythm to be able to harness the speed from it. I don't know if that explains it, but I know there was a deep relationship between music in the surf films and what we were trying to do on the waves. If you look at it, all the sets of waves come in rhythms, and usually they're about 12 seconds apart each wave. You can hear a rhythm hitting the shore every 12 seconds, a calm night coming from the ocean.It changes.Is.

[01:14:05.310] - Speaker 2
It always 12 seconds?

[01:14:06.530] - Speaker 1
No, that's the average. It could be 14, 15. It could be eight. It's like the longer it is, usually the cleaner the swell. When it comes from really far away in Hawaii, it's like that interval gets longer, and those are the really big ones. You can hear it, too, during the night when a new swell starts to hit, and you can tell when there's an old swell that you can hear, and then the new one starts to become faster, the waves are becoming faster, and they overtake It gives you weird rhythm sometimes in the night when a new swell is coming. There's a certain rhythm, but it's such a slow rhythm. It's hard to think of it as music, but it's really calming.

[01:14:41.310] - Speaker 2
That's probably also related to our heartbeat the fact that we are rhythmic life creatures, and so is the ocean. It's rhythmic life. There's some relationship there. I think of music as a celebration, and I think in some way surfing seems like a celebration of life. They both have this exuberance and passion in them. We talked earlier about how beautiful it is watching surf movies, and I can't think of another sport that you could watch for hours. I don't want to watch baseball for hours or basketball for hours without knowing the story of the game. If you take the story out of it and you're just watching what's happening, I don't know that there's anything else like surfing. You also snowboard, and even that's different because you're moving, but the mountain's not.

[01:15:34.160] - Speaker 1
Yeah, that's true. There's a big difference. It feels like one continuous drop when you're snowboarding. Yeah, I've tried it a few times. I'm not great at snowboarding, but it's fun. It's a lot It's a lot more like skimboarding than surfing, snowboarding, because you're using the rail of the snowboard instead of the fins on the bottom.

[01:15:52.200] - Speaker 2
Skimboard on the...

[01:15:53.840] - Speaker 1
Like sand sliding. It's on the wet sand, then you hit the wave. We do that quite a bit when we were kids.

[01:15:59.860] - Speaker 2
I used to do that when I was a kid, too. It was really fun.

[01:16:02.240] - Speaker 1
We'd spend hours and hours. Then you'd slide down and hit the wave and do a front flip or different tricks. It's just a good way to spend time. You learn a lot in the short break. There's a lot of lessons that kids learn. It's an important place to start when you're real little.

[01:16:18.440] - Speaker 2
Do you ever play festivals or do you only do your own gigs?

[01:16:21.890] - Speaker 1
No, we do festivals pretty often. We do a little mixture of the both. I like festivals for the collaboration with other I love collaborating live. It's really fun. To me, it's like the best part of it is getting to meet people. You like their music, and then you get a chance to meet backstage, and you get a sense of who seems like they're willing to collaborate and who's got their blinders on just wants to do their thing. But anytime we can. We always have our openers when we're on tour, come up and play a song with us in the night. Just a lot of fun.

[01:16:54.850] - Speaker 2
When you do a collaboration with an artist that you don't know, might you do a cover song Yeah, it depends.

[01:17:02.570] - Speaker 1
Usually, we'll find, or we used to be that we'd say, Hey, what music do you listen to? And if we both knew an artist, you knew that song? We'd find something we all knew, and we'd have a go-to list of the covers that we'd do with people Sometimes. Then we started realizing this happened a little more once we got further along, that sometimes the openers would know some of our songs, so we'd be able to... They'd jump up for one of our tunes. Sometimes what we do now is we'll find, especially if the band has a little time, we'll listen to some of the music of who's opening, find a song that we like, and then do a mashup where it might just be the rhythm similar, and we can put them together, and the keys can change and all that didn't matter. Or it might be a similar key, and we're willing to change the way our song sounds to match it with theirs and go A and B between the songs. We've done that a little bit. It's fun. I love when you get just somebody who has either guitar or a horn or something, and you can just tell them what key it's in, and they'll come up and lift the song up.

[01:18:02.000] - Speaker 1
So get in to play with somebody like Gary Clark Jr. Yeah, incredible. Or Lucas Nelson. Great. Just really good players. We love doing that. Sometimes, Lucas is a really good friend now. He lives in Hawaii. And over the years, we've gotten to know each other. So if we're in the same town, he'll jump up and play a bunch of songs with us. He'll just be part of the band for a little while. And he's great. I saw him do a version of Angel Flying Too Close to the Ground recently at his dad's 80th birthday, and it was just mind-blowing. I told him, I was It was one of the best live moments I'd ever seen. It was so good. It was just him with a guitar singing. Then when it came part for the guitar solo, he did this beautiful solo, and it was just like, he stepped away from the mic, and it was the way his Yeah, he honored the way his dad plays solos. It was wild and beautiful and gipsy. Then he came back to the mic and just started singing again. It was like something. I can't even explain the whole crowd.

[01:18:57.100] - Speaker 2
Have you ever seen Willy play live?

[01:18:58.400] - Speaker 1
Oh, yeah. A lot of time. Yeah, so incredible.Ridiculous.I love Willy. He's one of my favorite humans. It's weird when you get a chance just to meet people that inspire you as much as somebody like Willy, Neil Young. Getting to meet those people has been a weird part of my life, getting to say hello. Then Willy has just always been so welcoming into his family and his world. Living in Hawaii, partly, we've done a lot of shows together. He's come and supported. My wife and I have a nonprofit called Kukua, Hawaii Foundation, and he came and played at our Kukua Festival. That's the first time I met Lucas. He was a teenager, and he was playing with his dad. And Willy's great. Actually, I have a song about Willy called Willy Got Me Stone and Took All My Money.

[01:19:43.180] - Speaker 2
About gambling?

[01:19:44.250] - Speaker 1
It's a true story. Yeah, I bet. It's a true story. It was really funny because he saw himself on stage. He's so comfortable up there. We were on stage still, waving to the crowd and doing the final bow at the end of this festival that we did on Maui one time together. And he leans over. He's like, Hey, you want to go to my house and play poker? While we're still waving everybody. So we went over there, and it was a really funny night. A lot of friends were with us, and Ben Harper was there that night, too. And so I wrote this song. I got his approval before I sing it live, but it's a funny song.

[01:20:19.100] - Speaker 2
I know that you're interested in conservation of the ocean. In all the years that you've been focused on it, what's been the biggest breakthrough that you've seen that can really have impact on cleaning up the ocean?

[01:20:33.570] - Speaker 1
That's a good question. One of the things we do a lot, and it's really... It's important to do, only to open people's minds to how big the problem is, really, but beach cleanup steps, it's really just putting a bandaid on it because this plastic is coming in, and it's only one problem. There's lots of problems with what's going on on the planet right now. But if you look at plastic in the ocean ending up on the shores in Hawaii is one of the things that as a surfer growing up in Hawaii, you've seen over our lifetime get exponentially worse, where the high tide line is just becoming colorful with bits of plastic. And after going on a Our expedition, we made a documentary called Smog of the Sea. We were doing this, collecting out in the ocean with a trawl. And every time we'd put it out, even if we were days away from land, there'd be plastic coming up. When you look at that problem and you have these beach cleanups, you clean that beach up, you come back in a few weeks, and it's just full of plastic again. The solution is turning the tap off of plastic being produced.

[01:21:42.160] - Speaker 1
But you see these conversations start. Families come down, people come down, and it's really while doing the beach cleanup that you start talking and you hear people talking and opens their eyes to what's going on. Then to be able to see products you're using or just to learn about the fishing industry and the amount of plastic being produced and those things. It's an aha moment for a lot of people. I think they're important to do. But I've heard other people say this, too. It's like, if you're only going to go to the beach for a day, don't make it a beach cleanup. The beach cleanup should be for people like myself who get to spend so much time down there and have the responsibility. Otherwise, you want to take your kid to enjoy nature. You don't want to hit them over the head with the problem. It's like, really, the most important thing you can do, I think, is make a kid fall in love with nature so that as they grow older, they'll protect protect the things that they love. And if they love nature, they'll all protect it. To rewind with all that, it's like one of the programs we do in Hawaii is called Plastic Free Hawaii.

[01:22:38.480] - Speaker 1
It's really about trying to give people the tools to go plastic free. We go into the schools and talk with the kids. But we also have a storefront now called the Kukua General Store in Hawaii. We have bulk refill in there and reusable water bottles, all these different options. People can go in and just get inspired. Little parts of their life they to change and try to take the plastic out of their day-to-day life. That's one part of it. It's like when you're talking about the plastic problem, but there's so much with the acidification of the ocean.

[01:23:10.710] - Speaker 2
Also chemicals. Farming on land that's affecting our oceans.

[01:23:14.780] - Speaker 1
I mean, it's just there's so many things. I don't know if I'd be able to point the one thing. The thing that my wife and I and our organization in Hawaii is we're doing is focusing on making kids fall in love with nature. We're doing Farm to School program, too. Great. We have a little farm, like an eight acre farm over in Haleiva now, and field trips can come there. Kids just get to have a lot of fun. We have an area that's some natural springs come up through, and we've been taking all the invasives out, and work groups come in and we plant the native plants back in. Then you get to see the insects come back and the birds. I think when a kid can see those little bits of hope, even if it's just like you circle an area and say, Hey, sure, there's lots of problems in the world. I'm going to work I'm going to circle this, and I'm going to work on this little native wetland. Then to see that over a span of two years, you can get rid of invasives, you can put natives in, you can see the native dragonflies come back, and then the native birds Planting those little seeds of hope, I think, is really important.

[01:24:17.950] - Speaker 1
Those are the things... That's what I like to do, at least. That's what I like to spend my time doing is seeing kids come and get to plant seeds.

[01:24:25.750] - Speaker 2
Have you seen that documentary? I think it's called Biggest Little Farm. Yeah, that's great. Yeah, really Really inspiring.

[01:24:30.710] - Speaker 1
It's a great story. I like that a lot.

[01:24:33.740] - Speaker 2
Cool, man. Anything else you can think of that would be good for us to talk about? Anything in your notes you want to check?

[01:24:42.770] - Speaker 1
The notes. My biggest one was the one about the reflection of the water. Oh, yeah. I like that one. I heard that in a book. That's cool. There's one really nice thing you do where you stop and you talk about all the senses you're feeling in the and listening to two birds and whether they're communicating with each other. Again, it just reminded me of the process I went through to write a song on this last record. It's the last song on the record. I can't remember the name right now, but I literally woke up early. It was one of those days, for some reason, I woke up before the sun rose and I sat outside, and I started by playing guitar and I was just having a cup of coffee. Then I decided it was really quiet at first and I could start hearing the birds. I put the guitar down and I just listened. The song wrote itself really quick. It was about the feeling of such a beautiful morning and getting to see the light come out and hearing the birds begin to sing and then realize you can't hold on to that moment.

[01:25:42.360] - Speaker 1
You have to let it go. And then And there was even a part about watching out on the horizon, I could see a storm going by and how a storm looks peaceful when you're far from it and you can watch it from afar. And there were some metaphors in there about the storms going on in our world at the time. And that's the fun That's the part about songwriting. Sometimes something will come from nowhere, like we've been talking about, and then being able to find the layers and connect it back, even if it's other songs on the album, and be able to think about how those songs relate to each other. That was a fun part of your book to listen to as well and to read.

[01:26:19.170] - Speaker 2
Typically, when you go into an album project, you don't know what it's going to be about. You just start writing songs, and then eventually the songs tell you, Oh, there's a bigger theme From here? Yeah.

[01:26:31.060] - Speaker 1
I've always just... Every album has been a collection of what's been on my mind for the last few years. Then there's sometimes where I'll find a song just doesn't fit, and then it gets put. There's sometimes this song, actually the melody I remember that same song I was talking about, the last one. I've been trying to work on to an album for three albums. I had this, and I kept thinking it was maybe my favorite one. For some reason, there was no words coming to it. And I kept bringing it up, and it was funny because I played it for Blake when he was like, Okay, we're getting towards the end here. We have an album, but is there any other ideas you have or little things? I feel like there's still something. And I played him the song. It was funny because I played the part, and he was like, This is the best one you got. Where has this been? This is the one. And then we ended up working on that song. I really like how it came out. It was the last song that we did. It was when we were pretty much done.

[01:27:23.790] - Speaker 2
When you're singing, are you thinking about the words you're singing?

[01:27:28.850] - Speaker 1
Yeah. As I Usually, even live, I'll try to put myself back to where I was when I wrote the song. If it's an emotional song and I want to tap into that same feeling I had, I'll try to put myself back to where I was when I could really feel the meaning. Definitely when I'm performing them, I'll try my best. In the studio, when they're new, you want to tap into that same emotion you had, not just be reading words off paper, but feeling it as you're singing it. That one, it It was I had lost a really close uncle right before, so I was singing to him, but I was singing to my father, who's been gone for a while now, just like, You can always come home if you can hear me now, because sometimes my dad will visit me in my dreams, and I just love it. It really feels like a real visit. I know it is. But I was also singing on a way to my son who had just gone off to college and wanted him to know he can always come, but he has a place, he has his home.

[01:28:28.140] - Speaker 1
I was singing to a lot of different people that were important to me. Then also singing to the self, which I think is often the case. It's like whenever the songs are a meditation or an idea, I'm mostly trying to remind myself It's like the songs are almost like a meditation for me. And so it's a reminder to myself, you can come back to this place. You can return to this where you're centered. So I think about that morning like it's a real thing when you're in a moment you don't want to pass sometimes time can really hurt. Then other times I feel like a pretty good relationship with time, that I'm okay with the passing. That song, in a way, for me, is just a meditation on being able to let it pass and let it go rather than getting stuck in those moments that feel so good. Curvana gets said, and I like this a lot, is that when you find yourself somewhere really comfortable or nice, just say out loud, If this isn't nice, I don't know what it is. Then you let it go. But it's like to at least appreciate those moments where everything's comfortable and you're with people you love.

[01:29:33.820] - Speaker 2
Beautiful.thank you so much for doing that.Yeah.

[01:29:36.240] - Speaker 1
Thank you.Great.That was a lot of fun.
