[00:00:08.810] - Speaker 1
Tetragrammaton tetragrammaton tetragrammat. I was very active as a little kid, like I was with running around. I was always kind of I loved games, so it wasn't like I was a turtle bookworm. And I was the youngest of four children, so it was a busy house in terms of just energy difference in.

[00:00:37.720] - Speaker 2
The ages between you and your siblings.

[00:00:40.590] - Speaker 1
My eldest brother, his older brother, he's five years older than me. And then I got a sister who's four years and then a sister who's two years older. So there's four of us within five years. Yeah. And then a younger brother with my mom and her second husband. My stepfather arrived 13 years after I was born, so I was the youngest for a good chunk of time and all that. That goes with being the youngest in the film.

[00:01:03.900] - Speaker 2
Do you think your tastes were shaped by your siblings?

[00:01:09.350] - Speaker 1
It's hard to tell, isn't it? I think definitely my musical tastes were shaped by my elder brother, who's, like, going up to his room, there was a lot of violence. He was really into heavy metal. He got me into, like, Led Zeph and he got me into Black Sabbath and Rush and Genesis, and he was kind of into that sort of music. But my parents were, like, big. There was more books than music in the house, put it that way. There was a record player and we did listen to music, but I suppose we, like, listened to the charts together and stuff like that, me and my siblings, and apart from my brother, who got really into a particular kind of area of music, but it was a house full of books, kind of. There were, if not books, in every room, and it was quite a big house. There were books in multiple rooms. It always felt to me like books were just part of the reality that I knew as a child. Yeah. There's a lovely line in David Mitchell's novel, a Thousand Autumns of Jacob de Zut, where this guy? Dr. Marisness is explaining to Jakob Dazoot, the protagonist, about his childhood.

[00:02:07.020] - Speaker 1
He was brought up by these two women in this house that had an amazing library. And he said, to this printed garden, I was given the keys, which I just love. A printed garden is the most beautiful description of a library. And I remember when I read that phrase and when I was reading this book, I was like, yeah, I was kind of given keys to a printed garden as a child. And that garden has just got bigger as I've grown, as I've just discovered more books and have been involved in the creation of books. The garden has been multiplying.

[00:02:38.310] - Speaker 2
Were both your parents big readers?

[00:02:41.010] - Speaker 1
My dad was a gardener and then he was a river keeper, but he was really into history and my mom definitely loved reading. But I wouldn't say books weren't their life in the way that they are some people.

[00:02:53.720] - Speaker 2
So how did it occur for the house to be so full of books?

[00:02:57.970] - Speaker 1
Because I think they were kind of culturally curious people and books were just part of the kind of broader fabric of what but what was also beautiful rick was there were so many beautiful things in the house, books being one of them. My mom was amazing is and she's still alive, an amazing collector of art and sculptures and beautiful furniture and tables. So my sense of esthetics was really kind of honed in this beautiful house. But it was also a big garden with a stretch of the river, itch and at the bottom. And my father spent most of the time outdoors working. So my sense of connection with nature, from a very young age, I was allowed to kind of run wild and there were these woods in the garden and this stretch of the river, and my dad was always kind of was building bonfires with him. So I had that other side, which in certain respects was a bigger part of my father's life than, say, books. But it was a lovely balance and combination. I feel very blessed to have had.

[00:03:56.990] - Speaker 2
That kind of how would you describe the area? Where was the house?

[00:04:00.800] - Speaker 1
It was in the south of England in a county called Hampshire. So it's kind of an hour southwest of London. And, yeah, it's a pretty part of England and it was a very lovely house to grow in.

[00:04:14.610] - Speaker 2
If you were to go shopping for groceries, where would you go?

[00:04:18.690] - Speaker 1
Probably Winchester was the kind of closest city that one would kind of do shopping in. There was a big vegetable garden there as well at the house, so there was not a huge amount of grown. There was not like we were kind.

[00:04:30.490] - Speaker 2
Of self sufficient to picture the city. Was it one row of buildings or.

[00:04:35.380] - Speaker 1
Was it a whole do you know, Winchester is like a kind of ancient city. I think it was the capital of Wessex in kind of 1000 Ad. I think it's got one of the longest naves of any cathedral in the world. Winchester Cathedral is an extraordinary cathedral, so it's a kind of ancient city. And I went to school there as well, at a school called Winchester College, which is, I think it's the oldest school in England. So it's got an amazing history as a city, but not big. It didn't feel metropolitan or kind of urban. It was like a big town is what it felt like. But it also had kind of things like this extraordinary cathedral and had a real deep sense of history as a place. And that was only 4 miles from our house or something, but where we felt felt really in the country. It's like you felt very removed from kind of urban life there.

[00:05:27.750] - Speaker 2
And then when at school, would you say music was a major part of.

[00:05:30.990] - Speaker 1
Your was, I think like I was into it. I was really into music, but I wasn't playing any instruments, for example. And I was DJing, but not at that age. I got into DJing. I really got deeply into music. When I went to Edinburgh University, I was already really into music, but I was very fortunate in that in my first year at Edinburgh University, I lived in a private flat rather than going into kind of student halls. Someone had said, a friend who was already at university, a friend of one of my sisters, said, don't go into you know, there's so many better options. And she hooked me up with this guy called Charlie McVeigh. He was in his third year and there were two other third years and I was in my first year and I walked into Charlie's flat and I reckon there were like 1502,000 records in this house and he had the most beautiful magpie eye and ears when it came to records. There was like jazz and funk and Latin and hip hop and reggae and folk and country and classical and opera and a lot of rare vinyl, particularly from America.

[00:06:41.230] - Speaker 1
And I was suddenly like, I had this incredible kind of space to learn. And he taught me also buying secondhand records. We'd go out a lot of secondhand record shops and that's when I got really into jazz and funk and soul and hip hop and reggae. And that's what ultimately led to me starting this club in my third year at university when all these a lot of my peers had left and no one was playing in any club the sort of music I wanted to dance to. So it was a kind of, on one level, a purely selfish thing. I wanted to play the kind of music I loved on a big sound system and had enough of a sense of its quality and belief in its quality and just its beauty as dance music, that if I loved it that much, kind of, why wouldn't other people love it? And that turned out to be true. So we used to get just great crowds turning up at the club who.

[00:07:31.740] - Speaker 2
Just interesting that back when we were growing up, the access was such a key. I remember in terms of music, I had one cousin when I went to his house, he had Bruce Springsteen records and more like traditional rock records. And then I had another cousin who had craftwork albums and Talking Heads albums and more modern sounds, but that was the only access in those days. If you didn't have access to these.

[00:08:00.730] - Speaker 1
Albums, to the actual physical thing, you.

[00:08:02.830] - Speaker 2
Couldn'T really hear that music. There was no way to access it other than buying the albums or knowing someone who had them completely.

[00:08:11.130] - Speaker 1
The first record Charlie ever played me, I remember he was almost like vetting me to see if he was know, I was someone he'd want to have in his flat for a year. And he'd just come back from New York. His mom and dad were American, and he just bought that second Simande album called Promised Heights. I don't know if you know it De la Sol off the first album, 3ft High and Rising. I think they take four or five of the samples off it and there are a lot of samples on that record, but four or five come from the first two Semande albums.

[00:08:40.550] - Speaker 2
Let's play a little clip from it.

[00:08:41.990] - Speaker 1
The first track he played was called The Recluse.

[00:08:44.830] - Speaker 2
Okay.

[00:08:46.810] - Speaker 1
And it's simande. C-Y-M-A-N-D-E sitting, smoking, killing time climbing ladders in my mind close you seeking finding ways to hide joining shadow left behind will adopt has gone to set me free and comfort me alone incredible. Beautiful.

[00:09:49.530] - Speaker 2
And the fact that it was as long ago as it was and you remember this particular track is incredible.

[00:09:55.130] - Speaker 1
Particular track. This must have been 1988. I'm in Charlie's flat on his parents not Flat House on Gilston Road in London. I walk in and I've never met him before. We have this mutual friend called Lucy, and we're just chatting away and he's just come back from New York, and it's got a beautiful cover. The Promised Heights is the name of the album. I remember him getting it out, putting it on. It's the first song he played me, and I was just like, I'd never heard anything like before. And I was like immediately, Whoa, that's beautiful. The whole record's beautiful. And the first album is also great. And it was interesting. Like, the first album has a song called The Message on it, which you not as in grandmaster flashes The Message. But there's a beautiful cover by Blue Mitchell, the trumpeter of it, in 1973, which is probably one of the hardest funk tracks I've ever heard. Also a cover of Samanda's the message. There's a beautiful, more reggae version of The Message. I forget who did that. And it kind of got me realizing there's this huge kind of world of music that I didn't know anything about.

[00:10:55.800] - Speaker 1
So to then be in this flat where and Charlie, because he was very into this music and he found someone who was almost like a kind of disciple, who was, like just wanting to just I just had a huge hunger for and also we happened to like a lot of the same music in terms of but it was such an eclectic range. It wasn't like we were into just one kind of niche. So I felt, what a blessing. When I look back in hindsight, that age 19, I was suddenly living in this flat with a beautifully curated collection by this guy who had magnificent taste in music. And it opened so many doors in my mind and I went to so many places thanks to being in this flat. And it was from there that my kind of real passion and love of music. And particularly, I think it was black American and Jamaican and American music. That's where so much of what we were listening to, the blues, the funk, the soul, the reggae, the dub, and it goes back to that point you were making the less obvious stuff that you wouldn't hear.

[00:11:57.830] - Speaker 1
Certain radio stations might play it if you were lucky.

[00:11:59.920] - Speaker 2
If you didn't go to that house that day, you may have never heard any of that music in the rest of your life. Because it's not around. I mean, now we can access it, but unless you knew to look for it, you wouldn't look for it.

[00:12:14.300] - Speaker 1
Yeah, no, it was great. I remember there was something you were talking about which reminded me of the experience when I was running the club Chocolate City. These two DJs, Andy or a one, as he was known, he was kind of brilliant hip hop DJ and kind of scratching champion in Scotland. And this other guy, John, the scratching champion of Scotland.

[00:12:34.330] - Speaker 2
The idea that that exists.

[00:12:35.610] - Speaker 1
Yeah, they had a competition for, like, kind of and they were both brilliant hip hop DJs, so their skills of mixing were just way beyond mine. I was more of a selector than a really technically brilliant mixer. And it was lovely. We used to do the club Chocolate City every Thursday, and sometimes it was every other Thursday. And I remember we'd get to the club and one of us will have just suddenly got a record that the other two had heard about but had never heard before. John would suddenly bring out, like, I've just got this incredible Soul Searchers album and we're putting it on it. It's a track that's already it's got a track and it's already been sampled by Public Enemy or whatever. We're like, oh, my God, that's the fucking original. Or we're listening to kind of Herbie Hancock's wiki Whack is it called? The one that backed by Dope demand samples. And it's, oh, my God, we're listening to the original. Or blow up the Herbie Hancock, which is then taken by groover's in the heart by delight. The sense of like, oh, my God, you're holding almost like holy relics, it felt like for us, because also, as bits of art, setting aside what's in the record, just the physical object, this was often it was like deleted vinyl.

[00:13:48.160] - Speaker 1
And you'd be getting this pressing from 1972. And it's the original thing. And it felt holy to us. Yeah.

[00:13:53.610] - Speaker 2
And it was like the source code.

[00:13:55.240] - Speaker 1
It was the source code. And we taught each other, we brought into each other's lives all sorts of music over this four years of running this club together. And I was, like, running it. But they were the kind of two main DJs and my girlfriend, who was actually Charlie's younger sister. So I met my first wife through Charlie. Not only did he introduce me to this whole extraordinary kind of world of music that I might not have otherwise realized. He also introduced me to my first wife, the mother of my eldest two kids, and so I feel very indebted to Charlie and that set of circumstances that resulted in us living with each other for a year and then living with his sister for twelve years or something.

[00:14:37.910] - Speaker 2
And it reminds us that when you were looking for a place to live, you weren't looking for that experience.

[00:14:43.530] - Speaker 1
No.

[00:14:43.850] - Speaker 2
You were looking for a place to live while you were going to school.

[00:14:46.040] - Speaker 1
Yeah, exactly. I had no idea.

[00:14:47.600] - Speaker 2
The universe provided this opportunity for you and you recognized it and dove in.

[00:14:53.920] - Speaker 1
And grabbed it with both arms because I could feel there was something really of value and of joy and of meaning, because it ended up having a very significant impact on my life in lots of ways. In fact, it was charlie was also I went to Edinburgh to do History of Art was the degree I was kind of nominally had arrived to do. But the lovely thing about the Scottish University system is it's four years rather than three years, and as long as you do the necessary modules in your first two years, you don't have to fix on your honors degree until your third year. And he was doing literature and he said, I was trying to work out which of the other subjects I would do along with History Vault, which I had to do as one of my three modules. And I did English Lit one and English Lang one, and I ended up doing my degree in literature partly because, again, Charlie's saying, you know, history rock's great, but literature, I think, would be more interesting for you. And he was, I think, right. And then again, it was with Charlie. I'm in a record shop called Vinyl Villains at the top of Leithwart, which is this long road that goes from the center of Edinburgh down to the docks, and there's a record shop called Vinyl Villains and we're like going through the bins together and we'd often go out buying records together and it was a great time for buying interesting vinyl.

[00:16:10.380] - Speaker 1
You never knew what you were going to find in a shop. And I see this reggae Sunsplash record from 1980, and it's got a Gil Scott Heron track on it's, mainly reggae artists, it's Michigan and Smiley, it's Sugar Minor, but there's a Gil Scott Heron live track of there's a recording of him performing live a song he wrote about nuclear power stations called Shut Them Down. And I'd heard in someone else's flat, just two weeks earlier, someone had put on the H Two O Gate Blues by Gil Scott Heron off the album Winter in America. And again, I was like, who is this singing? I'd never heard Gil's voice before. And the guy was called John Trick. He's like, this guy called gil Scott Heron. And I don't know how well you know that song. The H Two A Gate Blues. It's gill's decimation of the Nixon administration.

[00:16:55.950] - Speaker 2
Just let's listen to a little of it.

[00:17:04.230] - Speaker 3
Don't want to be involved in this, man. This here, this is this is going to be a blues number. But first I want to do a little bit of background on the blues and say what it is like. There are six cardinal colors and colors have always come to signify more than simply that particular shade, like red neck or got the blues. That's where you apply colors to something else to come up with what it is you're trying to say. So there are six cardinal colors yellow, red, orange, green, blue and purple. And there are 3000 shades. And if you take these 3000 shades and divide them by six, you'll come up with 500, meaning there are at least 500 shades of the blues. For example, there's the I ain't got me no money blues. There is the I ain't got me no woman blues. I ain't got me no money and I ain't got me no woman, which is the double blues. And for years it was thought that black people was the only one who could get the blues. So the blues hadn't come into no international type of fame. But lately we done had Frank Rizzo with the lie detector blues.

[00:18:19.230] - Speaker 3
We didn't have the United States government talking about the energy crisis blues. And we're going to dedicate this next poem here to Spearhead X, the ex second in command in terms of this country. And the poem is called H 20 Blues. And if H 20 is still water and gate is still gate, what we're getting ready to deal on is the Water gate blue. Let me see if I can dial this number right quick.

[00:19:00.250] - Speaker 1
Click.

[00:19:04.510] - Speaker 3
I'm sorry, the government you have elected is inoperative. Click inoperative. Just how blind will America be? The world is on the edge of its seat defeat on the horizon very surprising that we all could see the plot and still could not let me do that part again. Just how blind will America be? The world is on the edge of its seat defeat on the horizon very surprising that we all could see the plot and claimed that we could not just how blind America just as Vietnam exploded in the race snap, crackle and pop could not stop people determined to be free just how blind will America be?

[00:19:46.970] - Speaker 1
So I was played that age 19, I was like, Fuck me. This guy is he's got it all. He's got humor, he's got political sharpness, he's satirical, he's got a gorgeous voice. The music with Brian Jackson and him just with these incredible kind of creative partners. And, yeah, that record came out in 1973. So just after Watergate, he drops that like three months after Nixon's been impeached. And it's just like and I was like, wow. And then I'm in this record shop going through the bins and it's this Reggae Sunsplash, and I see Gil Scott Heron's name. I'm like, Whoa, that's kind of and it's also his dad was actually Jamaican, so that's not the reason why he was in Kingston. But he always had a connection with Jamaica. His dad was actually the first black footballer to play in the Scottish leagues. He was called the Black Arrow and he played in the 1950s, played for Celtic in Glasgow. So I pick up this record, I still got it two pounds 50 from Vinyl Villains. And then another beautiful thing, gil is playing at the Queen's Hall in Edinburgh in four weeks time. And I'm going, no fucking way.

[00:20:53.870] - Speaker 1
This guy who I've just heard two weeks ago, and then I've just bought this record by a week ago or ten days ago, he's playing in Edinburgh. So that's like, I've got to go and see this guy. And by this stage, I'm starting to listen to some of his other music.

[00:21:05.910] - Speaker 2
And just so I have an idea, how often do artists come through Edinburgh?

[00:21:11.440] - Speaker 1
Reasonably often. But Gil probably hadn't been there for at least two or three years. But he loved touring, first of all, he loved playing live and he loved the UK. He always had a strong kind of he had a strong set, a lot of friends here, a lot of connections with the here and around Europe. He used to play he was, like, particularly popular in France and Italy and Spain. He loved playing shows in Europe. So I get my ticket. I think Charlie's there too, and a bunch of us go and see Gil. I witnessed one of the most at that point in my life, hands down, the most remarkable live show I'd ever seen. And I don't know if you ever saw Gil play live, but he was as beautiful a communicator, the way he worked with audience, the way he spoke to audience. He was a stand up comedian as well as a brilliant. So he would sit on stage to begin with, without the rest of the band in front of the keyboards, and he would just start rapping and chatting and he would be, like, so good at ad libbing. So if someone yelled something out for the crowd, his comebacks were so sharp and funny and beautiful.

[00:22:10.410] - Speaker 1
There was a soulfulness to him and a kind of wisdom, but with this kind of gorgeous humor overlaying everything. And then he and his band are fucking awesome. And he's got a voice, one of the great to me, great voices in music. And afterwards, on my own, I remember I talked my way backstage and I brought this copy.

[00:22:28.840] - Speaker 2
How old were you now?

[00:22:29.630] - Speaker 1
I was like, 19. I got the copy of this from this Reggae Sunsplash from 1980. I talked my way backstage and it's not that difficult to get backstage, but I just had love to say thank you and to say hello to Mr to Gil Scott Heron. And anyway, he's not, like, super tight about that. Kind of gil doesn't really give a shit. So he's like, yeah, within 15 minutes, I'm chatting to Gil. I'm just like, Look, I've only come to your music recently. And he can tell. I'm just someone who's clearly been profoundly affected by his work and what artist doesn't in some way connect with that? And then after about five minutes of chatting away, I bring out this record and he just goes, what fuck is this? I've never seen this record in my life. And I'm like, Well, I just bought it. And I'm like, not embarrassed, but it's kind of funny that Gil's never seen the record before. Anyway, we have a real laugh about that. He thinks it's very amusing. And then he's like he calls me Bingo from the word go. Bingo. I'm doing a residency at the Jazz Cafe in Camden next week.

[00:23:25.410] - Speaker 1
Can I put you on my guest list? And I was like, I would love to be. So I go back there. I go and see him again second time, second shows. Every bit as good as the first. Similar in ways, very different in others. And again afterwards, I go backstage and we keep on chatting. So this is all in 1989, and we end up kind of just staying in touch. And whenever he's playing in the UK, he always puts me on his guest list. And then in 1991, I write or 1990. I'm trying to think when I started I write my dissertation for my English degree is called A Development of the Black Oral Tradition, the Hip hop Lyric. And I was really interested to see where hip hop had evolved from particularly lyrically, but actually just in all sorts as a kind of form of art. The political, the socioeconomic, the musical, the literary, the kind of drawing off the oral tradition in all these ways were it was a kind of area that I was really interested in. I read Ben Sidron's brilliant book called Black Talk it's where that book I was telling you about last night?

[00:24:28.150] - Speaker 1
Leroy Jones's book Blues People? It's when I first read that. And Gil is a very significant figure in this. If you think of The Revolution Will Not Be Televised from 1970, his whole style of delivery and you even get a little flavor of that in the H 20 Gate Blues. You can see why it was never a title that he was comfortable with, but he was called the Godfather of rap and all of that. Because if you listen to particularly something like The Revolution Will Not Be Televised with that kind of recurring bass line, it's almost like it's a sample in terms of the way it's being used. So I ended up writing about Gill and I was writing about Public Enemy and I was writing about SYL Johnson and James Brown and Millie Jackson and Ice Tea and just people that I thought were kind of part of this interesting kind of journey from the 60s through to basically, we're talking late eighty S in terms of hip hop. And during this time I discovered a few things which then affected the publishing I did later. First of all, that Gil had written a novel when he was 21 in 1970, called The Vulture, and he wrote a novel when he was 23 in 1972, called The Nigger Factory.

[00:25:31.300] - Speaker 1
So not only did I write him about my dissertation, but I was reading about this other work of his, which was kind of unknown to most people who are into his music. The books had never been published in the UK before, and when I ended up taking over Canningate in 94, kind of that's fast forwarding a bit in terms of this story, but I ended up getting into publishing, and I ended up taking over this publishing house that I joined in 92. In 94, one of the first people I called, one of the first things I wanted to do was to reprint these novels of Gills because I knew there'd be an audience for them.

[00:26:00.880] - Speaker 2
You knew there'd be an audience. You you knew exactly you wanted these books.

[00:26:06.460] - Speaker 1
And that was my guiding principle both as a DJ and as a publisher, is if I want to listen to it, if I want to read it, I don't believe I'm going to be on my own because I think I've been read enough and listening enough to know what is good and what's got kind of lasting value or real impact. If something's really affecting me, I'm not alone. Like, I'm just I'm one of you're a Cuban, I'm a human. We're all connected in profound, fundamental ways. And if something affects you profoundly and fundamentally, then my belief is that it's going to affect chance. Yeah, there's a good chance.

[00:26:37.460] - Speaker 2
Best chance you have.

[00:26:38.720] - Speaker 1
Yeah. It's the best guide you've got. The market's going to tell you nothing about that. The market is this kind of it's not even worth talking about on one level, other than that we have to operate within it. But it's not a guiding principle. And as a DJ, I wasn't playing the music that I thought they were going to like, they happened to love the music. We were DJing because we loved it. And so that was why the DJing, because I ended up fast forwarding a little bit, do my dissertation on hip hop lyrics. I'm getting hip hop lyrics and the evolution of the black royal tradition, and I'm getting more and more into music. And then I get to this stage where I realize that the kind of music that I'm increasingly becoming kind of knowledgeable about and loving is not being played in any clubs in Edinburgh. Seriously. Occasionally you might hear a DJ drop one track that. Would be drawing from this incredible period of like, 68 to 74 for black American music. It's just like, to me, in terms of dance music, and it was just a very purple patch of extraordinary.

[00:27:39.320] - Speaker 1
It's not to say there wasn't brilliant music happening before and brilliant after, but that was a kind of particularly incredible moment when all those jazz musicians went electric and all that kind of stuff that happened in the late 60s. Anyway, so the club Chocolate City, which was what it was called, that was named, I'm sure you know, this Parliament record from 1975, which, again, jumping ahead and doing a full circle here. Little did I know when I was calling my club Chocolate City the lyrics, or part of the kind of George Clinton rap in Chocolate City is they still call it the White House, but that is a temporary condition in my house. Stevie Wonder will be the Minister of Fine Art, richard Pryor will be the Secretary of Entertainment, aretha Franklin will be the First Lady, and everyone will have to carry a James Brown pass. And it just Chocolate Cities with vanilla suburbs. It felt like a great name for a club, Chocolate City, because of the music we're playing. I didn't know that. And then in 2008, I would end up acquiring before he'd even declared he was going to run for the Democratic nomination against Hillary Clinton, I would acquire Barack Obama's memoir, Dreams From My Father, and he would then become the fucking President of the United States.

[00:28:48.440] - Speaker 2
Unbelievable.

[00:28:48.890] - Speaker 1
So this was Clinton's vision for they still call it the White House, but that's a temporary condition. And when Obama went in, it was still obviously called the White House, but it changed its color in certain respects.

[00:29:00.580] - Speaker 2
Our understanding of what was possible.

[00:29:02.540] - Speaker 1
Yeah, exactly. So I love these kind of as I said, I had no idea when this club I started in 1990. I didn't know that it was going to have such a profound impact on my life because it kept me in Edinburgh after I finished university. And it was because I stayed in Edinburgh that I ended up working as a voluntary worker for this publishing house. I joined it in November 92. I joined Canningate and I've been there ever since.

[00:29:27.930] - Speaker 2
It's amazing. Tell me your first role and how did your roles progress within the company?

[00:29:33.590] - Speaker 1
I don't think I had a job title begin. I was just like a voluntary worker. I'd written to Stephanie Wolf Murray, who's the name of the name of the woman who was then running Cannongate, but had actually founded it in 1973 with her husband, Gus Wolf Murray, and a guy called Charles Wilde.

[00:29:48.100] - Speaker 2
It was still a relatively new company.

[00:29:49.640] - Speaker 1
Ten years? No, 73. And I was joining 92. So it was 19 years it had been going and it had been kind of publishing some interesting books during that time, but it had gone into receivership. It had gone, been put into bankruptcy in 1990 before I joined it. And then Stephanie bought back her business, but never had enough kind of working capital. So it had been kind of limping on through 91. And when I joined in November 92, kind of not only did I probably deserve not to be paid anything because I knew nothing, but they also couldn't afford to pay me anything. And then they got bought in March 93 by a big school and library supplier called Albany Books. That was when I was first given a formal job title and a contract and I was working in the publicity department. But I was always because I'd done my degree in literature and I was like a big reader. Stephanie just saw in me someone she could share manuscripts with, or I would come across something and say, I think this is really and I had this insatiable curiosity, as I just generally do, to learn about every aspect of publishing.

[00:30:56.370] - Speaker 1
The first book I ever worked on was an extraordinary new translation of the complete works of the Russian poet Anna Akmartova, done by this American woman called Judith Hemschemer. And they're just these extraordinary translations. And I'd studied Russian history and Russian literature as part of my degree. So I was aware of Akmartova not like a kind of expert on her, but I was very aware of she was a very significant Russian poet of the 20th century. And so the head of publicity was on maternity leave at that time. So I'd been kind of seconded into that department. I was reporting into her assistant and I said, I'm really intact, Mardova, I'd love to look after the publicity for this book. And I ended up writing to every literacy editor in the country, writing a very impassioned letter about why I thought this book was so good. And it ended up getting literally blanket coverage, every single newspaper. And Andrew Motion wrote this kind of extraordinary review in The Observer, just saying, this is the kind of supreme achievement of lyric poetry. Michael Hoffman in The Times wrote this amazing review and before we published the book, I knew that we were going to get a lot of review attention.

[00:32:00.440] - Speaker 1
So I was asking Stephanie about how the books got sold into the bookshops and the reps go round with their bags and they show them the covers. And I looked at the advance orders for this book and I could see there were like a hundred orders for the book across the UK. And I'm like, but we're going to be getting like the most insane amount of publicity. So I then start working the phones in the evening at the end of the day, calling the poetry departments, trying to talk to the poetry bar at Waterstones Deansgate in Manchester, or Waterstones in Gower Street or Borders on Charring Cross Road. And I think I like, quadruple the sub for the book, the advanced orders just on the telephone. And then the book ends up selling and reordering, and we sell, like, way more copies than anyone ever expected us to sell of this book. And it got this extraordinary attention. And it became clear to me that so much of what determines the success of a book is the kind of energy that you pour into it. And at some point, books can sell themselves. But your responsibility when you're launching a book is to help raise a level of awareness that these people know about it.

[00:33:01.660] - Speaker 1
If you don't read a review, and if it's not in a bookshop, the likelihood of you even coming across it is this, again, is pre internet. It's pretty small. So that was a very kind of instructive first experience of publishing, working on this Akmadava book, and also believing, I know nothing about publishing. I don't know anything about publicity, really, except I've been running a club, so I knew a little bit about marketing and publicity that but I knew that if you approach someone in the right way and it's genuine, your belief and passion for something, you can be persuasive. And I persuaded all these literary editors to review this book, which got more coverage than any Cannongate book they'd published had got in like, years. So it was also a book that felt very significant. So on one level, I had a great thing to be working with, but.

[00:33:45.920] - Speaker 2
It was a very persuasive is an interesting word. It's accurate, but there's something negative about persuading someone. And I feel like you were sharing something.

[00:33:56.780] - Speaker 1
I was evangelizing. I was evangelizing about it, and it ended up having the impact of them commissioning it. You're right. I wasn't maybe persuaded. Persuaded could be seen as a pejorative word. It almost suggests you're getting someone to do something against their wishes. Exactly.

[00:34:09.500] - Speaker 2
And it doesn't sound like that, but you're sharing something you love, and it's exciting. It's an exciting feeling.

[00:34:16.120] - Speaker 1
And they appreciate the fact that I was bringing it their attention, because then the people they commissioned to review it wrote extraordinary. Not only did it get blanket review coverage, the reviews were kind of out of this world as people saying, this is a major book, this is a major poet, you must buy it, kind of thing. And so a literary editor, they like it when whoever they assign it to review really responds strongly to a book and says that's what a great literary editor should be doing, is commissioning reviews of the books that really deserve merit attention. So that was a very I very quickly, at my time at Canningate, an experience that gave me more confidence in what I was doing, and also made Stefan say, well, wow, you did that with this. And so it became almost without it being I was still a voluntary worker, by the way, when I was doing that on the Act Martyr, but and I became formally part of the kind of the team and the company. In March of 1993, this was in Feb 93, we published this Akmarifer book and then the company got bought.

[00:35:11.880] - Speaker 1
And without getting into all the details of that, they then got into financial difficulties. So in 94 it became clear that this wasn't really sustainable, the kind of business for them and their own core business, this school and library supply, was starting to falter. And Stephanie, who'd become a really good friend of mine by then, she was very open to me about the kind of perilous nature of the kind of business and that it was probably going to be put into receivership for a second time within four years. And that's when I started thinking, there's a way to do this that's different from the way it's been done today. And also it was an amazing opportunity for me because the sum of money that we ended up paying for the business was actually a pretty small amount of money. And of course we had to get working capital as well. But by September 94 we'd completed a management buyout of it. We effectively bought it as a going concern. Although Albany put it into receivership for various financial reasons, it was better for them to do that and to write off all the money they owed to different people.

[00:36:13.480] - Speaker 1
And anyway, that's more detail than one needs.

[00:36:16.630] - Speaker 2
You were able to acquire the company for very little and save it from probably going away.

[00:36:21.770] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I think it would have gone away. There wasn't enough of a kind of brand at Kanegay and it didn't have a strong enough identity or even core list of back catalogs to make it for one of the big it would be in one of the London groups say, oh, we want to buy Kanegay as an imprint. So it probably would have disappeared entirely and those books would have remained in the world and some of them might have been picked up for reprint rights at another publishing house. But yeah, we probably by doing what we did, ensured that Cannegate as a publishing imprint and as an entity, it changed from Cannegate Press to Cannegate Books for legal reasons. We had to change its name in that respect. But Canningate, as a result of that, had the third kind of stage of its life as an entity. And it's just celebrated its 50th anniversary this year, which I look back and I think, Rick, how did that happen? Because it was not always straightforward and it never is publishing, but it was particularly hand to mouth for the first kind of five years and it's always been a bit of a roller coaster.

[00:37:24.980] - Speaker 1
As in, it's so difficult to kind of predict how a book is going to do. Sometimes you're disappointed, sometimes you're absolutely delighted and things. And we thankfully have had a more than our fair share of kind of breaks and bits of luck that have ended up with a book selling way more copies than we had expected.

[00:37:42.790] - Speaker 2
I love that. As you told that story, the bell rang.

[00:37:45.170] - Speaker 1
The new chapter felt good.

[00:37:46.700] - Speaker 2
The world was agreeing with your story. Beautiful.

[00:37:50.870] - Speaker 1
As are these swallows, which I absolutely love. I've been your swallows here, are they swifts or they swallows? I think they're swallows, aren't they?

[00:37:58.590] - Speaker 2
I think they're swallows. All I know is that they migrate here from Africa every year. The same birds come to the exact same spot every year. And then when the season changes, they go back to Africa and then they fly back. This time next year, you will see these same birds building nests in the exact same location. Not in the same area exactly.

[00:38:18.100] - Speaker 1
No. We had them at the house I grew up in, outside of Winchester, which we talked about at the beginning. It's called Abbotsworthy, and we used to have incredible swallows coming there. I was actually born in this house, in the actual house. My mom had her fourth child, me, in the house, and she said when she was in the last week or so and she had bedrest, she was like she could see this nest where this swallow had its young, and she was watching this as she was going through the final stages of her pregnancy with me. And then so, swallows, I've always had this lovely connection with in terms of the beginning of my life and my mom.

[00:38:53.220] - Speaker 2
How often do you come across something that you're excited about to publish? Tell me about what the life of a publisher is like.

[00:38:59.850] - Speaker 1
Well, the good thing at Canningate is there are lots of routes by which books come into the publishing house for us to kind of think about. And sometimes we go out and get things or we commission things, or there's an old book that we buy the reprint rights, so no one proactively comes to us with it. We go out and try and make something happen. But I have an amazing group of colleagues at Canningate. There are 60 of us in total now at the company. And in terms of the commissioning team, in the editorial side, there are six active commissioning editors who have all have different relationships with different agents, with different authors, with different international publishers. So I feel like every week, one or two, maybe sometimes three interesting projects coming in. That doesn't mean we're going to make an offer for them, but things that we're an editor saying, worth looking at, this is worth a conversation, this is worth sharing, and we get many, many more things than that a week. But the ones that actually get to the editors saying, this is worth our broader attention, that's probably about, on average, a couple of projects a week, maybe three.

[00:40:05.990] - Speaker 1
And of those, we only publish 40 originals a year. And at least half of those are with people we've been working for for many years. So the kind of number of free slots as it were, on our list because we don't want our list to be too big we've actually been getting it smaller and smaller rather than even though the business is growing. The new title Publishing count has reduced over the last few years. And I think for very good reasons. It's allowed us to focus more on each book and publish each, put more.

[00:40:33.310] - Speaker 2
Attention on each thing that you're releasing, give it its full.

[00:40:36.730] - Speaker 1
And then in terms of when interesting things when does something come in they get really excited about? Well, actually, quite often because there's a lot of really interesting things out there. There are certain things that, for me, personally, I read and think is really I admire it and I like it a lot, and I can see why it's an exciting thing for us to try and acquire and publish. And then there are the kind of, obviously, the passion projects where you feel especially connected to the book, its contents. The author, The Creative App, was a good example of that. This was something I had a very hands on role and continue to have a very hands on role because this is something we'll always be publishing your book. So we're on this kind of long journey. We feel with every book it's not just oh, we publish it and then you move on to the next thing. You should always be kind of publishing every book you publish in a way but you can't do that all thousands.

[00:41:23.380] - Speaker 2
That's an interesting idea. I don't know that the bigger corporate publishers look at it that way. I think there's more of a sense of if it has, the new release comes and goes and then on to.

[00:41:34.930] - Speaker 1
The next kind of there's a lot of great publishing going on at the big corporates but I do sometimes as an outsider to it because I've never worked anywhere else from canned. So I've never worked in corporate publishing. But I've co published books with lots of corporate publishers and I have lots of friends working in corporate publishing all around the world. And I sometimes feel just the know it's unfair to say it's like a conveyor belt, certain imprints. I think it really is like a conveyor belt. But the sheer volume of titles means that unless something has had a lot of money paid for it or unless it's by someone with a really high profile and it's often one of the same, it's very easy for a book not to kind of get the necessary attention in house that it deserves. And I think we're not alone. But I think independent publishers generally, because their lists are more focused, because they're not publishing these big brand name, best selling authors, they have to be more creative in launching new voices and publishing, bringing what they can bear to the publishing process, which is energy and focus and curation and real attention to detail.

[00:42:35.410] - Speaker 1
And these are the things that I think are vital for successful publishing, and particularly for things that don't have an obvious market for them when you first put them out into the world. So we're ultra selective about the things we take on. And there has to be it's not that everyone in the company has to love a book equally, but there has to be a genuine passion amongst at least some, if not all, of the people in the company to say, this is a book we have to publish. This is what we need to publish, because we think it's doing something, adding something really significant to the conversation, always just hugely entertaining, or there's many things that books do. They don't need to be telling.

[00:43:11.300] - Speaker 2
Some of the authors that you've repeatedly.

[00:43:14.660] - Speaker 1
Published, well, the one that's probably the kind of best known right now because of this extraordinary trajectory he's been on, is a writer called Matt Haig. He's a British writer. He writes children's books and he writes adults books, and he writes nonfiction as well as fiction. So he's quite unusual in that respect. And he came to us in 2010, having published his first three adult novels with Jonathan Cape, a very prestigious imprint within Penguin Random House, and they dropped him for his fourth novel, a novel called The Radleys. And Francis, our publisher at large, brilliant editor, and he and I have been working together for 22 years now. I remember him calling me, very excited, saying, matt Hague just got in touch with me. He's just sent me directly this novel called The Radleys. Jonathan Caper turned it down. He said, would we be interested in looking at it? And Francis was already a fan of Matt's writing and Matt very generously quoted on some there was already a shared sensibility. He was already a big supporter of some of the other writers on our list. And I'd never read Matt at this stage. But we end up acquiring this book.

[00:44:20.200] - Speaker 1
And it's a wonderful book about a family of abstaining vampires and the two teenage kids don't know they're vampires at the beginning of the book. But it's a serious book about addiction, it's a serious book about desire, but it's also an incredibly funny kind of family novel, just a social comedy of sorts. So we end up buying the book. The fact that he's been on a downward decline with sales at Jonathan Cape doesn't bother us one bit because we're just reading the book thinking, this is fucking funny. And this is a book that's got real commercial potential. So that was back in 2010, and we acquired world rights in the book. So we ended up selling him into quite a lot of languages and for a lot more money than we paid for the book. So even before we published it, we started to create something of a kind of event around this book. And then the book was published and it did well. Then it ended up being picked for the biggest book club in the country at the time called the Richard and Judy Book Club. So we did really nicely with it.

[00:45:11.350] - Speaker 1
But since then, we have published with Matt four adult novels, six children's books, and three books of nonfiction. So a lot. And he's also prolific as well as brilliant. And he'd never published nonfiction till he started working with us. He wrote a book called Reasons to Stay Alive, which is a book about depression and anxiety. He tried to kill himself in Ibiza in his mid 20s, having been kind of working in the club scene there at Manumission and stuff. He and his girlfriend, now wife Andrea, but they were in Ibiza for a few years. He was in a very, very low point of his life, and he wrote about it in this beautiful, kind of very personal and very original way of writing. It wasn't a conventional memoir at all. There's just one little poem in it called Self Help, which is just a four line poem. It dropped on just one page when you read it. There is a kind of linear flow to it as a book. You could read from beginning to end, but you can also drop in at certain points and just read a standalone essay, not unlike the creative act.

[00:46:14.230] - Speaker 1
On one level, it's got multiple access points. And this was his big breakout book. We'd done really nicely with his first two novels. We published The Radley's and a book called The Humans. But Reasons to Stay Alive became a big, big bestseller for us. And then we published a book called A Boy Called Christmas, which was a brilliant children's book inspired by his son saying to at one point during know, what was Father Christmas like when he was a little boy. And he thought he didn't have an answer to what Father Christmas like as a little boy. So he wrote a novel in response to his son's question. And we don't republish children's books, but we followed Matt in down that route. We had a huge success with A Boy Called Christmas. It was then turned into a great film that came out a couple of years ago. And we're now, at this point, Rick, where his last novel called The Midnight Library, is being published in 54 countries around the world. It spent 106 weeks on the New York Times bestseller list, the hardcover list. I think globally, the sales are somewhere between seven and 8 million copies.

[00:47:12.420] - Speaker 1
So, again, when we bought The Radleys back in 2010, he'd just been dropped by Jonathan Cape. There was no idea for him or us of the journey we were on. Incredible. So we've been on this beautiful journey with Matt for the last 13 years, and I can't even tell you what the title of the new novel is. We've got it under wraps till we announce it in September, remember? But the new novel, I've been thinking about it a lot again when I was reading you're in Jack's book, there's all sorts of interesting connections. The protagonist is called Grace, and there's all sorts of beautiful it's all set in Ibiza. And it's a book about it starts with that gorgeous Borges quote where he says, reality is not probable, nor is it likely. And it's about the kind of the mystery of life without wanting to sound too kind of crass, but it's a beautiful new book. So this is exciting. We're going to publish this in September 24. We're just starting to share it with his kind of publishers around the world. And that's probably the most for me, certainly from a kind of impact it's had on Cannegate.

[00:48:14.200] - Speaker 1
That's the single most important journey we've been on with an author. But there are many kind of we published this woman called Ruth Azeki who came into my life when I was ill. Her agent, out of the blue, drops me an email saying, I've never done this to you before, but there's a book I really need and want you to read because I think it's amazing. It's called a tale. For the time being, she's a Zen Buddhist priest as well as being an incredible writer, ruth Azeki and we end up buying this book. It ends up being shortlisted for the Booker Prize. We go on this amazing journey together. We find 25 publishers around the world. It's being translated. And her last novel called the Book of form and Emptiness won the women's prize. And we've done a beautiful book with her called Timecode of a Face, which I think you would love. I'm not going to get into the details of it now, but it involves her staring at Mirror for 3 hours as a kind of meditative practice and writing about what happens in the course of this three hour journey. She goes on just looking at her face.

[00:49:11.620] - Speaker 1
It's a very, very remarkable piece of writing. So Ruth's just one of many other writers that we've been on an interest. Jan Martel when we published Life of Pi in 2002, that was the first time we had published it. We published everything of Yan since then. And we don't think of publishing books. We think of publishing authors. So we like going on a long journey and going where they want to as long as we think it's a sensible thing for them to go on. We're very happy to say, you know what? This isn't working for us. Or maybe this is not going to be the next thing you should publish. And I think it's always important to have those honest and kind of frank conversations.

[00:49:44.530] - Speaker 2
If something's tell me about the editor's role in a book project in the extremes, from the least hands on to the most hands on.

[00:49:52.720] - Speaker 1
Well, the least hands on is literally an author is so skilled at the kind of self editing and stuff that they deliver something to you where you barely need to copy edit. It kind of it's kind of word perfect, as it were. Now, that is pretty rare. Even very established and acclaimed writers benefit from that objective perspective. That particularly an editor, sometimes agents, some agents were editors and play a very important role in that early shaping of a manuscript. And there are other books where the authors really want and need that kind of editorial back and forth with an editor they trust who's got real skills in being able to take that step back, which the author can't, and look at the overall structure and say, you know what? You need to introduce that character earlier, or this scene needs explaining more fully. And some books get almost rewritten as part of that thing in that they look so different. The final book gets published from, say, the first draft that an author delivered. Some authors don't deliver first drafts. They'll do multiple drafts before they deliver it. That doesn't mean it doesn't then need a lot of work, but it really varies enormously.

[00:51:03.160] - Speaker 1
And I think it's one of the hidden aspects of publishing, is the role that an editor can play in the actual creation of the thing that you read, because normally you just think, well, it's the book. It's got the author's name on it. You might read the Acknowledgments, and they'll say, thank you so much to X or Y, who really played a real role in the kind of gestation and kind of evolution of this book's being it really masses. It varies enormously. And also, sometimes an author needs a lot more work with help on one book, and another book just comes more easily. So there's no kind of rules there. I think, in a way, it's beautifully varied, and to me, all that matters is the final book. It doesn't matter how you get there and whether an editor plays a really pivotal role in it or not.

[00:51:51.270] - Speaker 2
Frankly, whatever's needed it's.

[00:51:52.630] - Speaker 1
Whatever's needed, exactly.

[00:51:53.560] - Speaker 2
I can remember Pico Eyre telling me a story that one of his most popular books, he wrote on the suggestion of his editor. His editor said, I think this would be a good book for you to write on this topic. And he wrote, and it was wildly successful. And I tend not to think of authors in that way as someone who might almost take an assignment, but it can work that way as well.

[00:52:13.310] - Speaker 1
Yeah. One of the projects that I'm really most proud of, that we created at Cannegate was we called it the Cannegate Myths Project, and it span out of a project I did in 98 called The Pocket Canons, where we broke up the Bible into individual books and commissioned, in all instances, bar one secular writers. In fact, bar two secular writers to introduce that. And we use the King James version of the Bible. Because of its incredible kind of Shakespearean literary qualities in terms of the language. And having published the second series of books, I felt like I was scraping the barrel of the Bible. We'd done like 20 of them. There's only so many books you want to reprint from the Bible actually can be read as works of literature, and the Four Gospels are great examples of that. As is Genesis. As is Ecclesiastes. As is Psalms. And I was thinking when I was young, it wasn't the Bible that interested me, it was myths. I was obsessed by Greek myths, particularly as a kid, but I like other mythological kind of traditions. But the Greek myths just captured my imagination as a kind of young boy.

[00:53:14.910] - Speaker 1
And I was thinking there was something dissatisfying about the Bible project. We got these amazing people involved, but they just wrote a 2000 word introduction. What about if I went to an author and said, look, you can take whatever myth you like and retell it in whatever way you choose, have 25,000 words and make of it what you will? In a kind of way of that was almost an extension of what's going on anyway, with myths, which is it's the constant retelling of stories. So they're so primary in our way of kind of connecting with others and reinventing stories and retelling them. There's no set version of the myth of Oedipus. It's a myth that has been told multiple times and will be told multiple times in the future. So in this instance, rather than going to authors first, I went to a bunch of publishers I've been getting to know around the world and said, look, I want to commission, in the first instance, half a dozen of these books. Are you in? And I just went to a brilliant publisher called Salamander in Spain, went to Ritzoli in Italy, went to Flamaria in France, went to Knot in Canada, went to Grove in America, text in Australia.

[00:54:16.200] - Speaker 1
There's a cabe in Holland. And by the time before I'd even commissioned a book, I had basically ten publishers saying on board, louis Schwartz Components Lettress in Brazil. So when I then went to the author and said, look, this is something I'm hatching canned, it was still pretty unknown as a publishing entity. Then I was saying, Look, I want to commission you to do this book and you're going to be published by company of Das Letters in Brazil, by Salamander in Spain, by Canop in Canada, by Berlin, Vallag in Germany. And the first person I asked to do this was I think it was the first was Margaret Atwood, who was immediately like, I love this idea. She retold the myth of Penelope and Odysseus, and he called it the Penelope Ad. And Philip Pullman took the myth of Jesus and wrote this one book called The Good Man Jesus and the Scoundrel Christ, which is brilliant. David Grossman took the myth of Samson and wrote a book called Lion's Honey, which was just beautiful. Jeanette Winston took the myth of Atlas and Heracles and called it wait. And Karen Armstrong, I've been in an event with one of our authors called Richard Holloway.

[00:55:18.620] - Speaker 1
He used to be the Bishop of Edinburgh. And I was with Michael Ondarchy, who I'd been hoping I might persuade to do one of these books. And it's a book about the Buddha, because Karan had just written a book about it. And Richard at one point, right at the beginning of the event, said, kara, I'd love you, for the sake of the audience to just to kind of expand upon your kind of definition between mythos and logos. And she then goes into this incredible riff about myth. And I'm with Michael. I've just been telling about Myth series before, and I'm thinking, God, if anything's going to make him want to do a thing. Kind of Karen just explaining why the myths and the retelling of myths are so important. So straight after that event, I'm in the kind of yurt at the Edinburgh Festival, and I go to Karen Armstrong and say, look, I'm working on this Myth project. Would you write a short history of myth for us? Not a specific retelling of one myth, but actually give us we're kind of storytelling animals, is one of the lines from it, which is not a particularly new phrase or idea, because it's been around for centuries that we are storytelling animals.

[00:56:12.940] - Speaker 1
But anyway, she wrote a book about a short history of myth. So that whole series, I commissioned writers to do something which they wouldn't have otherwise done, and in the case of Margaret Atwood, so we launched the series. I start working on it at Frankfurt in 99 is when I start having these conversations with these publishers, and then I start going to authors. I think in 2000, we launched the series five years later at the Frankfurt Bookwear, with 40 publishers around the world launching the series in their own countries. It was incredibly moving. We had a big press conference with Grossman atwood Armstrong. Jeanette Winterson. We had all the international publishers. There was media, TV, like, incredible kind of launch. And then Margaret Atwood ends up doing a whole tour with the other authors, actually. But then she ends up we come back to London for a kind of closing event in London at the Royal Festival Hall on the South Bank. And afterwards we're having dinner. And I say to Peggy at one point, I say, this was an incredible gift, you agreeing to retell this story, the story of Penelope Odysseus for our you know, I just wanted to say thank you because all the writers were good who were part of it.

[00:57:26.190] - Speaker 1
Having Margaret Atwood as part of that launch, she not only had real international kind of appeal, critically and commercially, she's a big writer. She's someone who sits in that interesting space that not all literary writers do. Anyway. She was very kind of modest and sweet. She said, Look, I'm just so happy you asked me to do it because otherwise I really enjoyed writing this book and I love this book, and I wouldn't have written it if you hadn't asked me. She claims I jumped out from behind a gauss bush before she'd had sufficient coffee in the morning, and uses a kind of mythological trope to how I managed to persuade her when she was vulnerable and disarmed.

[00:58:01.530] - Speaker 2
Had her morning coffee.

[00:58:02.720] - Speaker 1
Had her morning coffee. And it was again, it was up in Edinburgh, during a book festival up there, maybe in 2000 or 2001, that I jumped behind this gorse bush, kind of Loki like.

[00:58:13.220] - Speaker 2
Tell me about Edinburgh. I've never been paint me a picture of Edinburgh.

[00:58:16.840] - Speaker 1
It's surrounded by seven hills and it's got incredible kind of topographical kind of variety within it. The castle is on a hill right in the middle of the city. You've got this old volcano called Arthur's Seat, which is kind of a counterpoint to it, which is probably a mile and a half away, which is magnificent. Got these things called the Salisbury Crags on the front of it's, like, just visually stunning. You can see down to the sea from there. So it's not on the sea. Edinburgh kind of Leith and Portobello are the kind of the satellite towns.

[00:58:48.540] - Speaker 2
How many minutes to the sea driving?

[00:58:51.430] - Speaker 1
If you're going down to Leith, it's probably 15 minutes. It's close 20 minutes. And then if you look up the other way, you've got the Firth of Fourth, which is you go over the Fourth Road Bridge and that takes you into fifth. So you're kind of on this interesting corner in the northeast tip of the southern bit of Scotland before you get into basically go north up into the Highlands and beyond. So geographically, it's set in this stunning place. Architecturally, it's magnificent.

[00:59:18.670] - Speaker 2
Very old.

[00:59:19.640] - Speaker 1
Bits of it are very old. It's got and the New Town, as they call it, was actually built in the very late 18th, early 19th century. That's called the Newtown because it's in contrast to the Old Town, which is the really ancient part of the city, which is where Canningate's office is. We're just off the Royal Mile. The Royal Mile literally goes from the castle it's a beautiful street, goes for a mile down to Hollywood Palace.

[00:59:43.360] - Speaker 2
And would that be 1000 years old? Like that part?

[00:59:46.300] - Speaker 1
The castle? I think bits of the castle are like, go back to like 600 or 700. So like 1601, 500 years old. So you've got a real sense of history when you're in there. But it doesn't feel urban, doesn't feel like a big city in so because it's smallish, the population is, I think, only half a million or something, or 600,000.

[01:00:06.180] - Speaker 2
You can walk and it's spread out a bit.

[01:00:08.280] - Speaker 1
Ultimately it's spread out a bit with its suburbs and stuff. But actually, what I would regard as Edinburgh, the center of Edinburgh, is you could walk, really, from all the key places in the center of Edinburgh, from one place to another, not more than half an hour. So it feels quite compact as a city. And it's got Waverly Station. The trains go right through the middle of it, which is kind of cool. It's an old railway station, and it's.

[01:00:30.500] - Speaker 2
Kind of are they underground or do you see them?

[01:00:32.810] - Speaker 1
You can see them from certain points. It's got another beautiful hill called Carlton Hill, which has got almost like this unfinished acropolis on it, which is like they didn't finish it, which is kind of magnificent. So it's got this kind of neoclassical part to some of its architecture from the kind of 19th century. But it's a lot of cobbled streets, which is nice, not all. And like in many cities in the UK, terrible things was done in the, where they just knocked down beautiful crescents and stuff to put these kind of ugly monstrosities up for reasons that no one can really understand. Now. It seems kind of brutal what they did, but it's retained a lot of its character. And it's a capital city. It's got two brilliant. It's got three great galleries the National Gallery, the National Portrait Gallery, the Gallery of Modern Art. It's got a lot of things going for it and I think is a truly kind of international city. It feels lovely being out of London as well. It was for me, I think, a very important part of kind of what fed my kind of outlook. I think being an independent publisher, being out of London, being away from what felt like the kind of mainstream on certain ways, I felt had more space to kind of experiment and do things also.

[01:01:46.380] - Speaker 1
You know, independence and freedom are so connected, those two ideas. And I think for us, as a kind of publishing force, I think being independent and the freedoms that come with that have enabled us to do things that I don't think we would have done if we were in London. I think it's fundamentally altered our being as a publishing in house, as a group of people, as a collective, because of where we're situated. There's also an amazing tradition of Scottish writers and Scottish so it's rich in other ways, too. But I think the very fact that we were out of London and it just reinforced our independence in a way.

[01:02:20.500] - Speaker 2
One of the people I spoke to who works at Cannongate in London, though, came from the Edinburgh office, said, people in London look inward, people from Edinburgh look outward.

[01:02:31.510] - Speaker 1
I think that's so true and I'm so glad. I lived in Edinburgh for 15 years, and I didn't move down to London until 2004. So, in fact, yeah, it's one of.

[01:02:40.550] - Speaker 2
The things that growing up in a big city has almost a parochial view of this is how it is.

[01:02:46.880] - Speaker 1
You talk about it in a number of the podcasts you did when talking about your journey and being in Long Island and coming to the city and the kind of, first of all, the attractions of the city on one level, but also the different perspective.

[01:02:58.820] - Speaker 2
It gave you freedom to not fall into the single vision of, this is the way things are done.

[01:03:06.600] - Speaker 1
Yeah, because I think there are kind of multiple visions in any city of the way things are done. But there was something it's more to do with the kind of there's so much going on within the city of London or within any other big capital cities that the need or the feeling of the need to look out with is diminished somehow. And I think that point you make that this colleague of mine said is something I felt really strongly. I think my natural engagement with publishers from all around the world was partly fueled by being in Edinburgh than London. I'm not saying I wouldn't have wanted to have relationships with all sorts of publishers around the world if I was in London, and I now am in London, but I think it was part of my different outlook. It was the outlook. It's a different mentality. So I think we've been there for 50 years in Edinburgh, and it will always be canningate's heart will be in that city. And for the reasons we talked about earlier, it's the city where, because of living with Charlie my first year and meeting my Whitney, my first wife, my first two children being born there, and there's so many reasons why that city has I feel I owe it a huge amount.

[01:04:08.900] - Speaker 1
It's enabled me to grow in ways that are probably different from any other if I'd grown up in any other city or gone through my kind of early adulthood in any other city, I think I would have probably, possibly done different things.

[01:04:22.690] - Speaker 2
You mentioned earlier, going from Chocolate City and the reference to the White House to eventually publishing Obama's book. Being an independent publisher, how did you come to publish Obama's book?

[01:04:34.250] - Speaker 1
Well, that book has a very interesting publishing history. So it was published in 1994. Dreams from my father was published. And this was pre politics. He was just starting to get involved in kind of local politics in Illinois, Chicago area. But he had been this been at Harvard Law School he'd been to and he'd anyway, he was commissioned to write this memoir in his early 30s, publishes the book. It has a modicum of success in America and then goes out of print. And then he gives his famous speech in 2004 at the Democratic nomination, where he's this kind of young senator from Illinois, and he gives this speech that kind of lit the world up, particularly in America. People were like, wow, who is this guy? And so someone a smart editor working at Crown called Rachel Klayman. She was googling around Barack Obama. And so I was like, we published his memoir fucking ten years ago, and it was out of print, so they reprinted it. And I have a very close publishing partner in Australia called Michael Haywood, runs a great independent called Text, which canned Gate owned 70% of for a chunk of time.

[01:05:47.090] - Speaker 1
We were in direct business in that kind of way for a seven year period, but we've always coplished a lot of books together. He did the Myth series, he did the Bible series. We've shared writers and books since we first met in 1997 at a book fair in Chicago. And I was actually in the Bay Area. I was in Berkeley at a sales conference because we used to work with very closely with Grove Atlantic in America publishing our books in the States. So I've been doing this sales conference with PGW in Berkeley and I remember I'm walking in San Francisco and I've just had some great lunch, eating amazing oysters and stuff. And I'm walking along and I get a call out of the blue from Michael. And I'm outside a bookshop. When he calls me. Just by complete random chance, he calls me and says hey, Jamie, how you doing? Is this now a good time to talk? I'm like, absolutely. I'm just strolling in San Francisco, and he's like, I've just read this memoir by this guy called Barack Obama. And I don't know if you've heard of him, and I don't know where he's going, but this is a beautiful memoir, and I really want to buy the rights, the Australian New Zealand rights, and it's not been published in the UK either.

[01:06:51.410] - Speaker 1
And at this stage, we owned a big chunk of the business. Not that he was needing to get kind of my approval. It was simply just excited about it, excited. And you should read it as I'm talking to him, I kid you not. They've got a cutout of Barack Obama in the window of the bookshop that I'm standing outside, and I'm like, you're not going to believe this. And The Audacity of Hope had just come out at this point, which was his next book. That was the phrase he used at the Democratic nomination. It was The Audacity of Hope was this thing that captured people's imaginations. And I said, Michael, no kidding, I'm looking at Barack Obama right now. I walk in, I get a copy of both the new book, the Audacity of Hope and Dreams from My Father. Read Dreams From My Father on the way back to the UK. We end up buying the rights for both books. So we originate the new book, The Audacity of Hope, but then do Dreams From My Father, and then he declares he's going to run against Hillary. And to begin with, it's like, well, that's great that he is.

[01:07:47.610] - Speaker 1
That'll be good for the book. But no expectation that he possibly kind of take on the Clinton machine. And he was black and all the reasons, but for reasons that have obviously been well documented, what he did, and a grassroots level and interestingly, I've always thought if he hadn't written that book, he wouldn't have got in the White House, because by the time the election actually happened, that book had sold like 4 million copies in America. And if you read that book, you get a sense of that person that is very attractive, that's someone who's open. And there were a lot of factors that led to him getting into the White House. But I would say it was a significant factor that memoir in people trusting him, believing him, and realizing this is someone who's got a vision for this country. That is a vision that I kind of subscribe to as well. So that's how that happened. It was just one of these serendipitous things. Very fortunate when I look back on it. And obviously then became president and the book ended up selling close on 2 million copies for us. So it was like we didn't buy it with that expectation.

[01:08:53.840] - Speaker 1
We bought it because it was a brilliant memoir. Yes.

[01:08:56.250] - Speaker 2
No expectation of course.

[01:08:57.680] - Speaker 1
And that's a very there's nothing wrong with having aspirations and hopes for a book when you buy them. You need to in a way, you.

[01:09:03.810] - Speaker 2
Have to have a kind of vision.

[01:09:04.840] - Speaker 1
For how but that vision is not quantified simply in sales. It's like you've got a vision for how you want to put this book into the world, whether it then takes is out of your control at the end of the day or you've only got a little bit of impact on that at the end of the day. Other forces, not least readers, take over.

[01:09:23.740] - Speaker 2
Yes. Tell me about how publishing has changed over the course of your career.

[01:09:30.230] - Speaker 1
Wow, that's an interesting question and not an easy one to answer, succinctly other than to say it's changed a lot. Kind of the digital revolution is just one aspect of what's happened and all the not only in terms of formats because the ebook didn't exist when I joined publishing, audiobooks did exist, but on cassettes. This was even pre CD, I'm thinking, or maybe CDs were just happening when the point is audio was not a format. That was what it's become. But significantly, we didn't have online retailers and so Amazon didn't exist. And I think Jeff Bezos I think Jeff Bezos was at Book Expo America. I think first time he kind of exhibited Amazon there. I think maybe I'm getting the decade wrong, but I think it was 2004, maybe it was earlier than that. But the point is he had a little stall and he was just like an exhibitor at the Book Expo America. No one who met him then thought this guy was going to have the impact he did not just on bookselling, but on commerce and e commerce and the Internet didn't really know. But social media as we know it didn't exist.

[01:10:43.620] - Speaker 1
So I'm not saying these things have all changed publishing completely, but they've all played significant effects, both positive and negative on the way books get read, the way books get found. Kind of it's the cliche of the double edged sword. There's been so many positives, I think, that have come about from this and there's unquestionably been negatives. As you know, I was talking with my dear friend and one of my many mentors in publishing just at dinner a couple of nights ago, a man called Morgan Entricin who runs Grove Atlantic in New York, and we were wanting to chatted about one point. And it's not something was new to me, but just kind of morgan just articulating it again. When I first met him in 95, the literary landscape in America was one that had most newspapers had a dedicated book section. To them. The discourse around books within print media was very significant. It's been decimated. You've got the New York Times Book Review. You've got books occasionally get reviewed in the Wall Street Journal, Washington Post and stuff. But there's a tiny fraction now of what used to exist. But he created as a result something called the literary hub.

[01:11:59.820] - Speaker 1
Lit Hub, which has now become, using obviously digital technology as an online platform, gets something like 7 million visits a week for articles that they post and they're kind of trawling what's going on around the world. Really interesting articles to do with literature or stuff, putting them up there. So it's an amazing free kind of resource for people.

[01:12:22.820] - Speaker 2
What's it called?

[01:12:23.460] - Speaker 1
It's called lit hub.

[01:12:24.710] - Speaker 2
Lit Hub.

[01:12:25.380] - Speaker 1
That's the shorthand literary hub. Lit Hub. And he started it with no idea of where it was going to go. But it was almost because of this diminishing of the kind of discourse around books in the traditional media, he felt something needed to be a kind of corrective to that. So he created LitHub as a kind of spin off from Grove Atlantic. So that's a good example of where what's happened has been both good and bad in the last 30 years. Kind of the diminishing of traditional book coverage in the newspapers is sad, I think, because it's made it harder to publish certain kinds of books and break new writers in the way that papers could really help that. But then podcasts and websites like this, social media, there are all sorts of things that have provided a kind of a counterbalance to some of the things that have made it harder to publish. There are lots of things that have made it easier to publish, easier to get word out about a book and actually give less. The gatekeepers of the newspapers or the traditional media had such a control over it. Now it feels like it's a much more open playing field in certain ways.

[01:13:29.730] - Speaker 1
So as an independent publisher. I feel that it's a good time to be an independent publisher also because the broader industry has just consolidated a lot. And this Simon and Schuster acquisition by Penguin Row House was actually not backed by the DOJ in America just recently. But that would have been yet another massive piece of kind of conglomeration. But you've basically got know, supergroups in the English language and there's Berthelsman that owns Penguin Random House and hundreds of imprints. You've got Hashette that French Own, that owns Little Brown and a lot of publishing in the US. And you've got Harper Collins, which is kind of another of these huge groups. And you've got the Holt Spring Group that owns Macmillan and Piccador and all of that. And Simon Ashuster is the other one. Kind of these entities didn't exist 40 years ago. You were just seeing the beginnings of the kind of the acquiring of independent publishers and bolting them together to create these kind of bigger businesses and all the kind of benefits of scale that can be enjoyed if you're a bigger business. So that's just increased and increased over the last 30 years.

[01:14:41.550] - Speaker 1
But there's new independents popping up and I think the independents that are still around there are some really kind of in Britain, which is the market I know most. There's Faber and there's Serpent's Tail profile. And there's Granter. And there's us. And there's Pushkin and there's Atlantic. And there are a number of independents who are doing, I think, brilliant work and can publish at a level that can compete with the biggest publishing groups because of this kind of level of playing field in certain respects. So I think if you're focused and you're sharp and you're kind of careful about what you publish and how you publish it, I think it's actually a really exciting time to be a publisher. I certainly feel as excited now as I have at any point in the 31 years I've been at Canada.

[01:15:29.550] - Speaker 2
How have bookstores changed?

[01:15:31.440] - Speaker 1
Well, that again is an interesting thing where in the UK all the book chains, the kind of specialized bricks and mortar book chains have disappeared. Apart from Waterstones, the only other one that's on the high street that's a chain is WH Smith's and they sell stationery and all sorts. They're not really a book section. They do have book sections.

[01:15:48.970] - Speaker 2
They're often in airports as well.

[01:15:50.350] - Speaker 1
Yeah, and often in airports. They're significant there. But all the other chains that used to be around, they've all been hoovered up partly by Waterstones, but also because of Amazon. Amazon has had a very negative impact on the traditional bookshop, the ones that kind of Waterstones and Barnes and Noble are now owned by the same company run by this guy, James Daunt on both sides, who started life as an independent bookseller running Daunts in Marlbourne High Street. And then he built a small group which still exists, of six or seven independent bookstores all part of the Daunts chain. And partly due to him, he's turned both of those businesses around and kind of because they were really flailing in the naughties and they didn't know how to compete with Amazon. And what James did which was so good and it's what all the great independent booksellers do is they made a virtue of their independence, their relationship with their customers, their curation of the space, all the things that actually Amazon are not very good at doing. And Amazon's. Great. If you want to buy a book, you already know what it is. But for discovery it's not so interesting.

[01:16:57.340] - Speaker 2
That Amazon has grown into what it's grown into starting with just books.

[01:17:01.310] - Speaker 1
It is, isn't it?

[01:17:02.140] - Speaker 2
Because while we love them feel niche compared to they feel niche compared to everything else. And the fact that the entire Amazon.

[01:17:10.260] - Speaker 1
Business began with that just books but I think Bezos has talked about that coming about. Books is like other kind of perishable goods and stuff. It's like, first of all in the warehousing of them. They're relatively high priced for the amount of space they take up and that they as inventory to sit on. I think it has a kind of longer life than some inventory. It doesn't have to be turned around as quickly. You've got and also he recognized that there was no competition for what he was. I think their branding was the biggest bookshop in the world. And it was a really simple but true proposition that he had 250,000 titles in his inventory to begin with. And a big bookshop, a big bookshop has like 50,000 and often a bookshop will only have 4000. So he recognized an opportunity and a very kind of what you lose with.

[01:18:00.750] - Speaker 2
That scale is the curation.

[01:18:02.560] - Speaker 1
Absolutely the curation the table of the new releases and they don't give a fuck about curation. Amazon, there was a time when they started, they had brilliant editors who were doing Amazon staff picks where actual individuals were reading books highlighting them within the ecosystem of Amazon saying this is our book of the know. And you'd actually get a person writing something really smart and incisive saying this is a book worth your attention. And I think they just oh, we don't really need that. It's like a cost that we can know.

[01:18:33.010] - Speaker 2
It's also an opportunity for someone who wants to start a business to be an overlay on the Amazon fulfillment center of this is my independent bookshop online, my digital independent bookshop.

[01:18:45.170] - Speaker 1
Well, you know, the whole bookshop.org. Do you know about bookshop.org? Which is a fascinating online bookselling kind of platform which started this guy, Andy Hunter, gen Morgan, who started Lit Hub runs Grove was involved in helping Andy set that up too. And he launched it literally six weeks before the first lockdown happened. And what he did, which is very good is he basically harnessed all the independent booksellers in the country. So. They kind of harness all the orders online from these bookshops who could have their own website and do their own fulfillment, but they really engage with the independents and then they split a portion of all the profits that come from bookshop.org amongst all the independent booksellers. So it's created a central hub so they can do the fulfillment of books. The independent bookshop is either neither tooled up in terms of the actual dispatch or even just the stock to be able to do it. So they have the equivalent of Amazon type sized inventory of stock. So if a bookshop in Minnesota, if you go via bookshop.org and you're a customer of a Minnesota bookshop, you find your book and then you end up buying it on bookshop.org. Loads of authors have been really supportive of it.

[01:19:54.780] - Speaker 1
So they have brilliant lists from authors of ten books that they love. So it's really curated as a space and it's harnessing all the independent booksellers kind of kind of communities and it's then sharing profits from it throughout the whole independent bookselling sector. So it's created a very interesting alternative to Amazon. And the timing on its launch was just incredible. So I think Morgan, he was telling me over dinner that when he and Andy were talking about projections for their first year, I think Andy had said, I think we do like four and a half million dollars or something like that. And Morgan was talking to a friend of his at Ingram saying, what do you think of this? I think it's maybe both Phil and he was saying maybe it's more like little high. It's probably like three and a half or something. They did $41 million turnover in their first twelve months. So it kind of got off to this incredible start, which was almost a proof of concept, helped by the timing, obviously, but nevertheless and then they've started bookshop.org in the UK. Which has become as big as it is in America for obvious reasons.

[01:20:55.420] - Speaker 1
It's just much smaller market, but it's become a very important alternative to Amazon for online retailing. And Waterstones.com now got its shit together, which it didn't for the first you know what Waterstones did for the first five? I think for the first five, possibly even like seven years of Waterstones.com, they're online selling books. They allowed Amazon to do all the fulfillment and keep all the data for every transaction that took place on the Waterstones website. It's like because first of all, they were slightly dismissive of Amazon. They didn't think Amazon were ever going to kind of threaten their core business of bookshops, physical bookshops, and they thought online was just a small add on. So they gave it to literally what ended up becoming their arch rival. They gave them their entire online business for seven years. Just amazing.

[01:21:41.700] - Speaker 2
Yeah. Do you know the clothing store The Gap? Okay, so The Gap started as a seller of Levi's jeans. That's what they were known for. If you want Levi's, you go to the Gap everywhere. And then at one point, whoever was running the Gap decided, why don't we just make our own jeans? Why are we buying them from Levi's? And then one day, all of the people who were going to buy their Levi's, all of a sudden the jeans, now they look the same, but now they're Gap jeans. It's wild, these relationships that we think of as solid in business. There are a lot of pieces involved.

[01:22:19.070] - Speaker 1
Yeah. And we maybe exhausted the kind of subject of although, as I said, a lot has changed in the last 30 years in the publishing landscape. But the change of formats has been interesting. And it's interesting how there was a point about ten years ago when the ebook was really, or maybe even 13 years ago, 2009, 2010, I think was when the kind of ebook format started to really get kind of traction. And it wasn't just the Kindle and Amazon, it was like Sony had their ebook reader. And there were other things it grew so fast, so quickly, that people were like, if it continues at this rate, basically print publishing as we know it, and the reading of the physical book, and there were all these doomsayers saying it's only a question of time before everyone goes digital, and turned out to be utter nonsense. It actually plateaued after about three or four years and is now, I think, slightly declining ebook sales. So it's kind of interesting, I think, as an overall part of the market. I don't think they're more than 15% now, and it might even be more like twelve. At one point they were up at 20.

[01:23:25.480] - Speaker 1
And for certain areas of genre of fiction, in particular for crime and thrillers and romance, kind of very disposable things, I think they do have a bigger.

[01:23:34.700] - Speaker 2
Market share, but also there's people who get exhausted looking at a screen completely.

[01:23:40.650] - Speaker 1
That's part of why this happened. I also think publishers around the world have raised their game when it comes to the physical book. The production values, the amount of time spending on the typography, the covers, the COVID finishes, so that the thing itself becomes even more distinctive than a digital version. And I think the map of a book and your ability to navigate it is totally different with a physical book in the way you can it's a physical object, so it feels like it's got a cartography that doesn't exist with a digital version of it because it's three dimensional. So you kind of go into the book in literary, I think you go into the story in a profoundly different way when you're reading a physical book as opposed to something on screen.

[01:24:23.090] - Speaker 2
Russell Brand, who you've published, told me a story. He said he was having a conversation with you and he was referencing a book, and he said and the book that he was referencing was a self help book. And you said to him, all books are self help books.

[01:24:36.430] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I believe that.

[01:24:37.740] - Speaker 2
It's a great way of seeing it.

[01:24:39.320] - Speaker 1
Yeah. And I also think every reader is a bookseller, which is something I've always been passionate about. Every reader is a bookseller, and if you don't get that, then you're missing something very important about the role you have in engaging readers on behalf of the writers whose books you're responsible for taking care of. You have a real responsibility and duty as a publisher to look after those stories and to take those stories to people who can evangelize and share those stories more widely. I don't know if we've talked about something I initiated in 2000, and I think it was 2011, I did. It called World Book Night, where we ended up giving a million books to a million people in one day. Wow.

[01:25:20.740] - Speaker 2
Beautiful.

[01:25:21.160] - Speaker 1
I got every publisher in the UK involved in it. Well, not every, but there were 25 titles in the thing. We printed 40,000 copies.

[01:25:27.660] - Speaker 2
How do you decide on which books to gift?

[01:25:29.550] - Speaker 1
I got a group of I think we had a group of about 15 people on this committee to help us decide to come up with an amazing mix of 25 books. We had 2000 libraries and bookshops who were involved as pickup points for the givers, who each got 50 copies of a book that they loved, which they were then encouraged to give out in their community to anyone who they thought would. It was amazing. Rick we launched at Trafalgar Book Square in Trafalgar Square with 7000 people on a night in March 2011. And Nick Cave performed. He read the beginning of Lolita. Margaret Atwood read from the blind assassin John La. Carrie closed the show, reading the last opening lines of The Spy Who Came In From the Cold. Tracy Chevalier did this incredible reading from Beloved. Sarah Waters was there. David Nichols. Stanley Tucci. DBC. Pierre. It was a graham Norton was the compare for the night. So that's how we kicked it off. And then the next day yeah, a million books were given to a million people. And you know what started that was Margaret Atwood, when we were having this dinner about the myths.

[01:26:33.870] - Speaker 1
And I said, that was a beautiful gift, you agreeing to retell a myth for the Myth series. She said, I was glad you asked me. I would have done it. Do you know the Gift by Lewis Hyde? And I'd never heard of this book. And she said, this is one of my I've given more copies of this book away than any other book ever written, including any of the books I've written. And she said, you got to make me a promise. I'm going to send you this book, and if you love it as much as I think you will, you've got to reprint it. And I was like, well, that's a pretty easy promise to commit to. So I said, sure. We ended up publishing this book in 2008, I think it was. People who'd never read it before, like, Zadie Smith gave me this amazing quote for it. David Foster Wallace wrote this beautiful thing for the book jacket. And anyway, when we paperbacked the book in the Spirit of Lewis's book, which is about the kind of intrinsic nature of the gift that makes something that is given different from something that's been bought, that is part of a kind of commercial transaction.

[01:27:29.560] - Speaker 1
I was to my colleagues, look, when we publish the paperback, let's give we'll do it on the South Bank in London and Lothian Road in Edinburgh. Let's give 500 copies of the paperback away to whoever there's, just like, let's stop. You got to have someone who the person who's giving away has to know something about the book. Otherwise it just feels like you're giving out kind of one of those Bible, Jehovah's Witnesses kind of literature. And we did that in 2009 when the paperback came out. And I can't 100% kind of prove that it's why the gift of the paperback did so well. But the book ended up doing so well in paperback for us. And I feel by short circuiting the process by which books actually get read, I e putting them into bookshops. Someone's got to go into the bookshop, they've got to pay money for it. They've got to find it amongst the sea of books by short circuiting it, by going straight to people and saying, this is a book. I want you to have read this. Read this. We did something which I think directly impacted not the entire reason the book sold, but it had a very beneficial impact on it.

[01:28:28.290] - Speaker 1
So I've always believed that one of the smartest thing you can do as a publisher. So I've always given so many. I never travel anywhere without books on me, and I give people books randomly on the street, as you've seen from some of those photos I've sent you with the creative act. And when you give someone something like that in that way, with sincerity, with no expectation of anything in return, it does something beautiful between the interaction between two humans and then the thing that you've given is invested with something that it didn't have prior to being given in that way. So this was the thinking that's at the heart of Lewis Hyde's, the Gift, which informed the paperbacking of The Gift, which then created World Book Night, which Know is still going. It's a kind of initiative that I'm so proud of being part of. But it was my idea originally, and I then brought this woman, Julia Kingsford, and I really kind of honed the thinking together and then brought the whole of the kind of publishing industry in the UK on board with it.

[01:29:22.450] - Speaker 2
Tell me about letters. Live.

[01:29:23.880] - Speaker 1
Oh, God. Where to start?

[01:29:25.770] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the letters books first?

[01:29:28.550] - Speaker 1
Yeah, we published in September 13, two books about letters. One of was called Letters of note. The subtitle is correspondence deserving of a wider audience. Always love that subtitle of Sean. Great curated by this guy, Sean Usher, started a blog in 2009, became really popular, this blog, because he posted correspondence Deserving of Wider audience. He ended up getting some incredible traction with his kind of blog.

[01:29:54.520] - Speaker 2
And did you find out about him through the blog?

[01:29:56.710] - Speaker 1
No, I found out about him through a friend of mine called John Mitchison, who started a crowdfunding, really interesting publishing model, almost going back to the 19th century, when often books were subscribed to before they were published. You became basically you crowdfunded the publication of Alexander Pope's Poetry or whatever. This is how a lot of books came to be. So they were kind of printed to order 500 copies of the first printing to 500 people who played, all paid a guinea or whatever it was to do it. So he used this model using, obviously harnessing the power of the internet. First book they ever signed up was Sean Usher's Letters Of Note because it already had this kind of online kind of presence and following. And John, who I knew pretty well, he'd been at Harville Press, the independent publishing house. In fact, I first met him, he was at head office back in the day at Waterstones. We ended up publishing that book together and we did another brilliant book by Simon Garfield called To The Letter, which was a kind of a narrative, non history of the evolution of the letter within kind of culture, within society around the world.

[01:30:59.570] - Speaker 1
And I did this put this show on called Letters Live, which we did in a small little theater in West London called The Tabernacle. And Nick Cave is in the original volume. Letters of note. We published a very brilliant, funny, memorable letter about to MTV. He's just been nominated for the Best Male Artist Award, partly well, only because of this duet he's done with Kylie Minogue. So he thinks, first of all, it's ridiculous that I'm being nominated for it. They've never even played a Bad Seeds track on MTV or barely any. So he writes a letter basically explaining why he doesn't want to be considered for the Best Male Artist Award. He has this memorable phrase, my muse is not a horse. I'm in a race with no one. She scares easily. And so I called up Nick and said, look, I'm thinking about doing this event where I'm going to get people to read letters on stage. Would you come and read your letter to MTV? And he was like, sure, I'd love to read that letter. And I said, well, if you're going to come, if I get a piano on stage, will you play your song Love Letter as well?

[01:31:55.990] - Speaker 1
Because that would be beautiful, wouldn't it? I love that song. Gorgeous song. And he said yes. And then the next person I contact was Gillian Anderson, who I happened to just know in London. And there's a letter from Catherine Hepburn to Spencer Tracy in the book that was written, I think, 15 years after Spencer Tracy had died. And it starts, Dear Spence, and it's just this beautiful letter from Catherine Hepburn to the love of her life just saying I'm still missing you, and just reminiscing about him and their relationship. And I sent that to Jillian and she immediately was like, this is an amazing letter, I've got to read it. So suddenly Nick Cave and Gillian Anson were the first two to say yes. And it all just grew from know, we ended up putting on that show. Benedict Cumberbatch took part in that. So did Juliet Stevenson. So did Neil Gaiman. We had about a cast of twelve, I think. And then it just evolved from there. And off three of the first four shows Benedict did. So I went to Benedict and his partner Adam, who had also been his TV and film producing partner, and said, look, I want to move this concept out of Canon Gate and as a standalone business, Letters Live, do you want to come in as partners?

[01:33:02.660] - Speaker 1
And so Sean, who's the curator of the Letters of Notebooks and the website, and Sunny March, which is the name of Benedict and Adams TV and film company in Canningate, it's a kind of joint venture between the three of us. And the next show is at the Royal Albert Hall on November 16. Sold 5000 tickets in a day and we don't announce who's ever going to perform.

[01:33:22.030] - Speaker 2
Amazing.

[01:33:22.670] - Speaker 1
So you've yet to come to one, but I can't wait for you to experience one because it's a beautiful show because Letters are these incredible little time capsules and kind of a whole when we're producing the shows, we want to take people through the emotional wringer. We want to make them cry, we want to make them laugh. We want to transport them to places they've not been to make them think about things in a way that they've never thought about them. And Letters allow you to do that in a very exciting way. We've always had charities involved in every single show we've ever done. We've raised money for charity. We work a lot with literacy charities, which is something that's very dear to my heart, but also this great organization called Choose Love who do just really important work with refugees around the world. They were the beneficiaries of the last Royal Albert Hall shows last autumn and they're going to be the beneficiaries of the show this November. And now Montblanc have become our global sponsor for Letters Live, which is a lovely fit. So it's one of the other hats I wear beyond running.

[01:34:19.380] - Speaker 1
Canningate is being a kind of a key part of Letters Live. I love it.

[01:34:24.780] - Speaker 2
Beautiful. And it sounds like the kind of thing that there could be more live events related to reading and related to literature. You're proving that the written word performed live is of value.

[01:34:39.190] - Speaker 1
Yeah. And other people are doing it. I think we're doing it in a very specific way with Letters Live or Letters Live as I sometimes like to call it as well. But it's letters live. But is Letters Live because we bring letters back to life through the performance of them. But letters make up words which make up sentences which make up books. So Letters Live is actually, as an overall brand, could be used to doing things beyond specifically the letter form in that kind of more reductive sense. So I've sometimes thought we could do things that didn't necessarily have to involve the performance of letters. And we always have music as part of every show because that's an important part of the journey that we take the audience on. We always begin and end every show with a piece of music. So it's not just letters, but yeah, they're bringing kind of performance. Poets have been doing it for a long time in a very exciting way.

[01:35:29.800] - Speaker 2
But they're very few and far between. I don't know of any poetry events that are happening at the Albert Hall, not on a regular basis.

[01:35:38.170] - Speaker 1
The guy Matt Tod there. Just yesterday we were having an exchange about Paul Drago tumor, and I was saying, what he's done with poetry and Band? We should do a one or show, the Royal Hall. And Michael Horowitz did this famous thing in the Royal Album Hall, the Poetry Olympics, which had Alan Ginsburg out. It was like this incredible packed. And I think you're right, letters Lives has shown the appetite for this, for audiences. And I think poetry is another brilliant format of writing that really lends itself to performance. And because of its often short form nature to this kind of a collective show where you get a number of poems read like you get a number of letters by different people.

[01:36:16.790] - Speaker 2
Tell me how you came to publish.

[01:36:18.340] - Speaker 1
The Peanuts as a kid. The observer magazine at the back would always print one of those kind of landscape Peanuts cartoons. Not the kind of single strips, but like three columns. So as a kid, I religiously would cut out the kind of thing and my wallpaper in my bedroom was made up of Peanuts cartoons. I was obsessed by Snoopy as a kid. I love Woodstock and the whole crowd. But, you know, Snoopy is king, snoopy's king. And Woodstock is a very, for me, his little kind of court gesture. Woodstock and Snoopy were important figures in my kind of childhood world. So we ended up partnering with Phantographics, who did this incredible the complete works of Peanuts. So we joined them early on it. So we've done all 26 volumes of everything Schultz ever did. And then we've done these little spin off books and to me, it's just a kind of it's more than a labor of love. They actually do really well, but they're also just beautiful things to be representing to the world. I think charles schultz was a genius.

[01:37:18.550] - Speaker 2
Thank you so much for doing this.

[01:37:19.770] - Speaker 1
Oh, don't mention to be doing it here. I can't think of a better place to be having a conversation with you. Rick, it's a joy and a pleasure and honor. Thank you.
