[00:00:08.970] - Speaker 1
Tetragrammaton. Tetragrammaton, tetragrammaton.

[00:00:23.170] - Speaker 2
I was born in Atlanta, Georgia, in College park. And then three months after I was born, my dad got a job. Well, he had got the job right before I was born at CBS, channel two.

[00:00:39.020] - Speaker 1
Doing what?

[00:00:39.810] - Speaker 2
Tv news cameraman. So the guys and girls that hop out the trucks with the cameras. So he'd shoot stuff, produce stuff. So he shoots stuff in New York. But he also traveled around the world for CBS, and he did that for 38 years. When I was three months old, me and my mom, my brother moved up to New York with him. So we first lived in flushing for about eight years. And then when I was like ten years old, we moved to Jamaica, Queens.

[00:01:09.710] - Speaker 1
And describe that world, man. You have fond memories.

[00:01:13.760] - Speaker 2
I have all kinds. Whole cornucopia of it. The block I lived on, Keysville. Loads of kids the same age of me lived there. So between, it was like the boulevard. Farmers Boulevard, which you're familiar with, ll who you worked with and stuff like that. So he lived on Ileon, where his grandmother lived. I lived two streets up. So he's on. Off of Ileon and farmers. I'm on farmers in Keysville. And it's literally like, I can name off like 20 guys that grew up on that block. Yeah, so it was fun growing up with that many people around the same age of me. I'd pull out my basketball hoop and we'd have more than a full squad, like, too many people. And then people from other blocks would come and we'd have these wars between blocks. Know the main one was Hilburn Hillburn versus Keysville. It was fun, but also it was post crack epidemic, so the neighborhood was pretty dilapidated. Didn't have a lot of support from the city, so the school sucked. And it was a lot of crime. Not as much as it was during the crack epidemic.

[00:02:27.000] - Speaker 1
Do you remember pre crack as well?

[00:02:29.230] - Speaker 2
I know about St. Albans pre crack, but I didn't live there during then. And that's the interesting thing about St. Albans, was pre crack. Of academic Miles Davis lived there. Loads of people lived there. And it was actually considered one of the most affluent black neighborhoods in America. Like, know everyone's talking about the Rico law. Like, even young thugs. Trial. The Rico trial. Rico law was created in my neighborhood because this gangster from part of town named Fat Cat, he put a hit on a cop, and George Bush held that cop that got killed on news. He had his badge and was like, we're going to stop this. And it created the Rico law. That had all kinds of social and economic know. Supreme team, south side, north side, super close. But then loads of beautiful things, too. Loads of know. Hollis was right down the way. Run DMC.

[00:03:28.040] - Speaker 1
Would you describe it as urban or not?

[00:03:31.170] - Speaker 2
Oh, yeah.

[00:03:32.120] - Speaker 1
But it wasn't like Manhattan.

[00:03:34.950] - Speaker 2
It wasn't the city, and it also wasn't Brooklyn. It's funny, like, I remember one time, this is like, early 2000s, we went to go see Dave Chappelle in Long island, and my boy from the Bronx, I was with a bunch of dudes from Bronx and Harlem. We went. That I used to work with at Bertolf Goodman. We were all stock guys. They dropped me off. And I remember g was like, g? He was just at my wedding. I know g a long time. He was like, well, fuck, I thought you lived in the hood. Y'all got houses and front lawns. So queens, where we're at, there's houses, lawns, backyards, and a lot of people look more does. You've been around Hollis, it looks suburban. There's houses and descent, or third. And that's the interesting dyad of the suburban look. But then with the socioeconomic downturn underbelly, the crime underbelly. Then there's the music, the sports, the arts. I literally grew up between ll from Ileon tribe called Quest is up from farmers in Linden, up by Grady's liquor store where I used to work at, running them from down to Hollis, 50 cent. Like, one of my ogs used to hustle for 50 cent.

[00:05:00.930] - Speaker 2
All these things, this confluence of the music, sports. So that's why I always say, like, growing up, there was, like, the sandlot. That movie sandlot mixed with, like, boys in the hood. That was my upbringing. So it was, like, fun, beautiful stuff that I couldn't experience anywhere else in the world. But then some of my friends were getting killed and shot, going to jail, all kinds of stuff.

[00:05:29.470] - Speaker 1
Hypothetical question. How different do you think your life would be had your family stayed in Atlanta?

[00:05:35.070] - Speaker 2
Really different. Really different. Or even if we stayed in know, we moved to Jamaica, queens, because my parents couldn't afford a house in Flushing or bayside or anywhere like that. And because of, like, redlining. And Jamaica, queens, especially then, super homogeneous, there's no white people. The only white people were the police, and only people that weren't black were, like, the guys who ran the bodegas and the people who ran the chinese food stores. Everyone else, bus drivers, black, postman's black. But even me growing up during those nine years in Flushing, which was mostly, like, asian, white, little bit hispanic, very few black people even. That gave me those nine years, gave me a different thing. And then, obviously, just my parents, who they are, and then tell me about your parents, how we spent our weekends. Just great people, you know what I mean? And I also say. I always say, call them radicals in relation to where they came from, because both my parents came from a really small town called Harlem, Georgia, which is 20 miles from Augusta, Georgia. One red light town, 1500 people. Mom and dad went to the same high school that both their grandmothers went to.

[00:07:00.680] - Speaker 2
Both my grandmothers were in the same graduating high school class. It was my grandma Liz's birthday yesterday. She just turned 97. Wow. Yeah. So I spent my summers there, so every summer my parents would send me down there. But anyway, yeah, my parents are radicals. Because most people didn't move out of there.

[00:07:21.570] - Speaker 1
They dreamed of a better life or a different life.

[00:07:24.820] - Speaker 2
Different life than the small town that they came from. You know what? I asked my dad this question several years ago. I said, what made you want to leave Georgia? Harlem, Georgia? What made you move to New York? He said, the movie shaft. Because he said when he saw the movie, he felt in New York, you could be who you want to be. And he didn't feel that way in Harlem, Georgia, the South, that him and my mom could be who they want to be and experience all the things they want to experience. So they had an interesting road getting out of there. My dad, literally, he was a brickmason. He learned from my grandfather. And this is around when he was like 19. My dad been working since he was like six, seven years old. His first job was picking cotton for a sharecropper. Everyone's first job was picking cotton for farmers because farmers liked having kids do it, because kids could pick more because they didn't have to bend over so you could pick the cotton faster. So that was my dad's first job. My dad said he's been driving a car since he was like eight, nine years old.

[00:08:36.980] - Speaker 2
Real country shit. And he's 1819 at a burger joint, and it was his lunch break, and he wanted like a vanilla milkshake. So he went and he's in line, and he heard these two army recruiters talking about, and mind you, Vietnam's going on at this. Like, hey, you know, we just need a couple more guys to sign know, we got to get out of here in the morning. We got to try to sign up a couple more people, then we're not going to be back for a couple of months. And then my dad heard them say, that, and they were in front of a couple of people in front of him. They got their food and left out the restaurant, and he went and got offline and ran after them and stopped them and said, hey, I overheard you guys talking about the army stuff. He's like, yeah. They said, look, if you go to the army, you'll be able to take care of your family no matter what happens to you with the GI bill in all these things. You come out, you get out of there, you'd be able to go to school for free.

[00:09:39.600] - Speaker 2
You learn a job, you'll be able to take care of your family for the rest of your life if you go in there and you do what you're supposed to do. So my dad went home that night to my mom, his wife, and my older brother, who was probably one, and said, hey, these guys are leaving in the morning. They won't be back for months. What should we do? Because they both wanted to get out. So they made the decision that night at dinner. And that morning he left to go do basic training to go to Vietnam. And the stories even gets weirder and more interesting. But by the time he finished training, Vietnam got shut down by LBJ. While he was there, my dad wanted to be a dental assistant. He's like, this is a job. I can be a good job. All of the ors, which are called the jobs, were taken up except for the Charlie Mopick, which is a motion picture cameraman. That was the only. Or my dad was like, there's no way you guys can get me into the dental thinger. And they're like, no, you have to take this.

[00:10:45.680] - Speaker 2
And then he got into it. And then he said his instructors were these two rednecks, and he said these guys had worked in tv news. I remember my dad told me last time he told me this story. I've heard my dad cry, like, a couple of times in my life, and this is one in time. Like, literally, I remember my dad crying this time when the cops that shot Amadou diallo got off when my mom passed away. I literally can remember all the times my dad's cried a couple times. Anyway, he was telling me a story and he started tearing up. The guy said to him, they're like, we can't change how this country treats black people. We don't agree with it, but what we can do is train you so good that you'll always be able to have a job being a cameraman. If you want to be being a motion picture photographer, we're going to make you the best, because normally when you begin that job as a cameraman learning to shoot film, they have you carrying tripods and shit and holding the boon. They had him doing everything, all the main stuff from the very beginning, and they just sat back and just trained them the best they could.

[00:12:02.650] - Speaker 1
How do you think they did that?

[00:12:04.630] - Speaker 2
I don't know. My dad still remembers these guys names. This is back, my dad's turning 69. This is when he was 19 years old. I just think these guys were radicals in their own way. They were just humane people.

[00:12:18.600] - Speaker 1
It's a beautiful story.

[00:12:19.810] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[00:12:20.300] - Speaker 1
And did your dad come to, like, camera work?

[00:12:24.530] - Speaker 2
Yeah, he fell in love with it and became great at it. He got whatever, the highest discharge you can get. He was in the army for six years. Filmed all kinds of missions, like Panama canal stuff. All kinds of stuff.

[00:12:37.800] - Speaker 1
Oh, cool.

[00:12:38.550] - Speaker 2
All around the world. And then he came out and he started working at. He worked for affiliate down in Atlanta. And so him, my mom and my brother were down there, and he was shooting news, and he was great.

[00:12:52.310] - Speaker 1
You weren't born yet?

[00:12:53.530] - Speaker 2
No.

[00:12:54.220] - Speaker 1
How much older is your older brother?

[00:12:56.810] - Speaker 2
He's nine years older than me. Yeah. But, yeah, that was my mom and dad. And then they were a team, and their whole thing was just getting out of Harlem, Georgia, and enjoying life. And even when they're in Atlanta, they tell me the stuff they get into. Always going to music shows, always going to know. Very active. And then when they had kids, they started incorporating us to all know. Like one weekend, my mom would read the newspaper from the front to the back, probably every day. She'd always see what was going on in the city on the weekends. We go to the city a lot on the weekends. And one weekend it was like, we went to go see Pavarotti for free at Central Park. I mean, only thing I knew about opera is what I saw in a know. And then he had the Harlem boys choir singing. He was singing with the choir. But, you know, she felt that was something that her sons needed to see. That was not something that was even talked about in Jamaica, Queens. So they afforded me and my brothers a really dynamic mix of culture, whether it was going to Yankees games or going to see Pavarotti, or going to a Broadway play, going to a museum, going to different restaurants, or just going around downtown and walking.

[00:14:20.520] - Speaker 1
Would your mom take you to these places because she wanted you to see them or because she wanted to see them and you guys got to come?

[00:14:26.710] - Speaker 2
It was more so stuff they want us to see, but they'd be into it, too. So, yeah, I think it was both. And then also the cool thing about my mom was she'd get into the things I was into or ask me critical questions. Told my wife, Andy, the story a couple weeks ago. Somehow we were talking about with someone else. My man Lee. Lee Spellman from. He has a brand called Babylon. He's in a band called Trash Talk. We're talking about Onyx. Onyx. Also from my neighborhood. My homegirl used to date one of them. My best friend's cousin used to date one of them. They were barbers. They cut hair in a coliseum mall. Anyway, my first rap album I bought was throw your guns. The b side to it was me and Jack the black vagina finder. So I was like, mom, I want to buy this. I didn't know what the b side was, right. If I knew what the b side was, I probably would have been more clandestine about getting. I wouldn't have asked my mom to take me to go get this thing, you know what I mean? At whatever young age I was.

[00:15:36.400] - Speaker 1
How old do you think you were, man?

[00:15:40.270] - Speaker 2
Not even a teenager yet. Probably like eleven or something like that. Twelve. So then we go, we buy the single and she looks and she sees the b side and she goes, do you know what vagina is? A vagina is deadpan. And I was like, I do know what a vagina is. She's like, all right, you can listen to it then. You know what I mean? So her thing wasn't like censorship. It was about, do you understand what you're listening to? Do you understand what they're talking about? Do you understand that this is entertainment or this is music and you're a twelve year old boy, so you're not doing that right now. But you could listen to it, though, because I know you're going to listen to it. She didn't say that, but she knew I'd listen to it anyway. That's another thing, too. Like when they moved to New York, the guy that helped my dad get his job at CBS, he helped my dad get his job at CBS and he's like, hey, Tracy, you're not going to go anywhere working in Atlanta. You've outgrown that place. CBS has to hire some black people because of affirmative action.

[00:16:46.890] - Speaker 2
So they're looking for talented cameramen of color right now, with your accolades and affirmative action, you could get a job. So my dad went up there, was like skeptical and interviewed, came back, got the job, went up for three months, lived in a room in Fort Green back in the day until we moved up there so he could save up the money. I remember he told me, he said when he went up there or when he took the job or when we moved him and my mom had like a week's worth of pay in the bank or something. Like that's all they had in the world or something. And it was like. It was a risk because he was moving her up during a probation period. This same guy was like, yo, I know you love film. We should start a video store. So they opened up a video store in Elmhurst, East Elmhurst, Queens. It was called just us video, which is also like. That was my first intro to graphic design. Because play from kid and play worked there. And he designed store t shirts and stuff. A lot of personalities. Street cats, salt and pepper, Rockham, Kuji rap.

[00:18:08.900] - Speaker 2
They come there and rent videos and stuff. Me seeing them just doing things they couldn't have done down there. Or maybe not been exposed to.

[00:18:16.510] - Speaker 1
It's also interesting, like a video store, much like a bookstore or a record store. It's just a cool place to hang out.

[00:18:23.430] - Speaker 2
Exactly. Yeah. And the reason I bring up the video store is because they never censured me what I could watch. I've watched thousands of films since I was a kid. It was just cool, man. Whether it was, like Akira or Spike Lee films, even, like, Spike Lee knew the guy that was my dad's business partner. So he figured they had some money. He asked my dad, the business partner, to invest in she's got to have it. But all the money was tied up in the store. They didn't have any money. My mom and dad didn't have any personal money to invest in. She's got to have it. And the guy wouldn't allow my dad to invest the store money into she's got to have it. Because he thought the film wouldn't do well because it was black and white. He didn't like the fact that Spike was shooting a black and white film. My dad told a funny story. He said he ran into Spike a couple years later, and Spike was like. He was covering a story. Spike was being honored or something. Spike was like, man, you should have invested. But it's funny.

[00:19:24.970] - Speaker 2
I told Spike that story. He remembered. He remembered. He's like, tell your mom and dad.

[00:19:28.720] - Speaker 1
I said, how much you think movies inspired your level of taste.

[00:19:34.390] - Speaker 2
Yeah, I think it all started from the movies. It's funny. A movie I'd never seen before. And it's not a great movie. It's a Robert Redford movie called Sneakers. And it's about. They do espionage. And he has this company that teaches shows. Company. They'll break it to a bank to show them where their weak spots are. It's Robert Redford, Sidney Poitier, Dan Aykroyd. I watched it. I was like, oh, this is a great cast. But the movie was all right. But there's this furniture piece. It's like a armchair, but made of steel mesh steel. Anyway, I'm working with this furniture store that sells really amazing vintage furniture. And one of the pieces that I'm curating for them, which I had already chosen, was in this film that I watched a couple weeks ago. But I'm just using that to show is that all the films I watch, whether it was Akira Fiston or North Star, she's got to have it. One of my favorite films is Chinatown to this day. Example, when I was getting my wedding suit made, I said to the tailor, Ralph Fitzgerald, I said, hey, I want it to fit. Like know.

[00:20:45.890] - Speaker 2
So if I'm getting a suit, I go back to give the tailor, the suit maker an example. I go to a know from everything to, I think my ideals of what I think romance is how to treat my partner in certain things. I think you learn that right or wrong from a film. Even, like, you see a film and you see how someone's living just the way their abode is. And that might just be one or two scenes, but you remember it and you're like, wow, I don't know anyone that has a house like that or a place like that. I don't know anyone that has that many books. When I grow up, I want to have that many books on my bookshelf, so on and so forth. Music, even stuff now that I didn't catch. Like, we just watched the film the Last Emperor, and I didn't realize that the japanese musician Roy such, I can't remember his name. He died recently, like, last year. He did the soundtrack for this film. This is a film I've seen several times. Yes, you know, he did the soundtrack for this film. Or, like, watching Rumblefish.

[00:21:55.590] - Speaker 2
I didn't realize when I first seen Rumblefish that Stuart Copeland, who was the drummer and the police, he did the soundtrack for that, but the soundtrack always stood out to me. This felt more emotive than the soundtrack of most films. And then you get older and you start reading the credits more, or you learn more. Because when I first saw that film, I didn't know who the drummer and police. But as I get obsessed with music and learning everything about bands that I like, you start connecting the dots across books, film, music, art, whatever it is. Even performance art, anything. But, yeah, I think my ideals of what taste is started with my mom and dad and that store and it all. That was the seed. It all grew from there. Yeah. Even when we moved. So when the store closed down in 87, when we moved to St. Albans, we had more space than the house. Way more space than the house in flushing. My uncle Ray or my dad, they built these shelves in the basement and he took all the films out of U Haul storage and put them on the wall.

[00:23:09.360] - Speaker 2
So then I became like the blockbuster in the like. I remember my man Reggie, his uncle would send Reggie at the middle of the night to knock on my basement window and be like, Tremaine, give me a western. I give him a western. He'd go take it to him. He'd be like, I've seen this one already. He come back, bring it back. I give him a different western. Just shit like that. Or like loaning out kung fu films. And my dad's like, where's that film? And I got to go track it down now. Someone lent the film. I lent to them to someone else. I got to go to 20 projects to go get my. Go get the knock on someone's door in a project to get my vhs back. Because those things are like gold. Because it wasn't no streaming. I wouldn't let a lot of people in the house. But when they saw that collection of VHS and the word got out, it became a real currency. Then I started getting by starting my own collection of japanese anime. In the early ninety s, I would go to this place in flushing called Japan imports, take my little money, I saved up and buy different movies and built up my own collection.

[00:24:21.510] - Speaker 1
What was the first music that you felt like was your music, not your parents music, your older brother's music.

[00:24:28.390] - Speaker 2
Boot camp, click. And Onyx and some late 80s rap and stuff like that, it felt mine. But when, like Nas, mob deep, all that stuff, that was like, they're rapping about stuff and I'm seeing it happen. The onyx stuff too. But it was just something about the sound was still harkening back to little bit for me, that's what it was. Boot camp, click. All they were rapping about the same stuff and they're different versions of it. But mop dip, wu Nas, the sound was unto itself. And that sound felt like what I was living, you know what I mean? Those drums that felt like what was happening in Jamaica Queen.

[00:25:20.370] - Speaker 1
It was a whole new wave of music, really. It wasn't just a continuation. It really was a new chapter in the story.

[00:25:27.520] - Speaker 2
Yeah, they definitely were sons of what came before, but they definitely cut the umbilical cord, and I feel it. The umbilical cord was cut, and they were figuring out their own path. You know what I mean? They're on their own. Hero's journey.

[00:25:44.280] - Speaker 1
So growing up was hip hop everywhere. Like, hip hop was the form of music around in your childhood.

[00:25:53.180] - Speaker 2
As far as when I stepped out the house and hung out with my comrades, yes. For me, it wasn't the only thing, because, again, I had my older brother who was obsessed with Prince Love Rock. My dad listened to everything. I remember he bought me a cop killer iced tea. My dad's pointing to. He's like, and you got to keep this thing, too. It's going to be worth money because they're banning this. But it's important because my dad's like, he has the right to say this stuff. I don't think he's going to kill a cop. He's saying this to express the feeling of despair because of the interactions between police and young black men in America, and that's why he made this song. It's important. My dad kicked all that to me. I was, like, sick. That was a wild album. Ice Tea has a song, a storytelling song, about him dressing up as a ku Klux Klan and going to, like, a rally and stuff like that. Him and his man are at the Ku Klux rally and the two black guys. It was wild, wild shit, but, like, amazing storytelling and loved. I listened to everything, man, because the thing about me was I was hanging out in Jamaica, queens, all the time.

[00:27:15.770] - Speaker 2
But then I still ride my bike and go back to flushing to see my friends from flushing. And then I started hanging out in the city on my own. I would go to the city by myself and grab a village voice and just look, know, see what shows were happening at. Sobs or, like, I remember the parties in Jamaica, queens, would be like, either dance hall Soca or some rap shit. I loved it. I wanted to hear something else. I wanted to hear Prince. No one played prince, right? I wanted to hear all kinds of stuff. And I say prince because I went. I remember I was on first and first, and it was late at night. I was underage. I wasn't 21 yet. And I was walking down first and first by myself. Took the f train to the first and first stop, and this bar heard music, went in, and they're playing raspberry beret. And I could have cried because it was like, I'm getting to hear this song with people that I only been able to hear on my headphones. You know what? You know, cats like prince. But we were just deep into.

[00:28:33.810] - Speaker 2
Even if we weren't listening to it, we'd be hanging out on a corner in a neighborhood, hanging out. And then someone start reciting lyrics from Nas. Take it in blood. Then we all, it's like we come like karaoke session. We're all just reciting the lyrics, three verses, you know what? So, you know, as I hung out in the city, started to meet people as I start working. And that's why I always tried to get jobs in Manhattan. So then that allowed me to before the job and after the job to hang around. But I'm also making money, so I'm supporting my life.

[00:29:07.810] - Speaker 1
So how old are you when you start hanging out in the city by yourself?

[00:29:11.810] - Speaker 2
Probably 1617.

[00:29:13.310] - Speaker 1
And about what year is this?

[00:29:15.330] - Speaker 2
Started in like 97, probably.

[00:29:18.100] - Speaker 1
Describe what the New York scene is like. Like what nightclubs were there, what was the world like?

[00:29:23.570] - Speaker 2
I would say it was, if you're curious, you'll find fun, cool stuff to do.

[00:29:29.370] - Speaker 1
Everything's available, but you gotta know, but you gotta hunt it down.

[00:29:32.860] - Speaker 2
You gotta be curious, you gotta be on the search for something more. And when people saw that you were curious and interested, they would foster that. Even strangers, even. I remember my man Wilkins, he worked at union, the store called union that I discovered just by walking in the city when he was working there. I remember he was eating some food from a place called twelve chairs. Anyway, I just met him, we become cool. He's like, yo, you ever had baba ganous? I'm like, baba gawat. And he's like, baba ganous? It's middle eastern food. It's from a spot called twelve chairs. I was like, nah, but I love food. So he's like, yeah, you down? Because Wilkins, dominican dude, was not it. He still is. Good friend of mine from Brooklyn, he knew I was know young dude from Queens. He's a couple years older than me, so he knew I didn't know what it was. And it was almost like he's testing me to see am I curious or am I open or closed? I might be reading too much into it, but I think I'm right. So just as like a little example of it.

[00:30:45.920] - Speaker 2
It's just like, if you're curious, doors would open. Didn't matter how much money you had. What mattered was, were you curious?

[00:30:56.260] - Speaker 1
What did they sell at union?

[00:30:57.820] - Speaker 2
Clothes. But a lot of the clothing was like, either from Europe, Japan, and then he also showed a lot of independent brands, what people would call street wear.

[00:31:11.420] - Speaker 1
Now, which there was no such word back then.

[00:31:15.350] - Speaker 2
It was just clothing, but it was clothing that. Again, why I related to so much was it was in real time, so just the way, same way, the purple tape and stuff, and it was written and illmatic and hell on earth and all those records and all that stuff. I was living and seeing what was happening that they were rapping about, and the music felt like. I remember I went in the union. The year was 1999 or 2001. Between that time and Wilkins was working there. And I'm looking. It was a shirt with shot a on it. Now you go to urban outfitters and see a shirt with shot a on it. But back then, to see a shirt with shot a on it, and you weren't at a concert that didn't exist. I was like, wow, this is cool. And I love sade. I remember Wilkins being like, you like that t shirt? I'm like, yeah. And then he's like, and the t shirt was like, $28 or something. Too much money for me at that time. Equivalent to a $50 t shirt now or something. He took it. What size are you? I'm like, a large.

[00:32:26.370] - Speaker 2
And he goes, grabbed the large and put it in a bag and gave it to me. And he was like, make sure you come back and see me, though. Now they call that seating. They call that whatever they call, like, giving someone something free in hopes that helps promote your brand. He's just giving it to it because he saw my interest. I never forget there was this other store called Gnome de Gare that was a legendary store of also what people would call street wear now. Gnome de Gare was incredible. It was off a Broadway near atrium in a basement. My friend Angelo worked there, and the work he did there actually later led to his career at supreme for many years. But I went there one time because they had this Kurt Cobain t shirt and just a huge picture of Kurt's face. And again, that t shirt was like $50. It was too expensive for me. So I was like, in my head, I was like, it's been months. It's been like, it's the spring now or the winter that's probably on. Hopefully it's on sale. So I get on the e train, take it for an hour all the way to the city, and I go to nom Negera.

[00:33:37.270] - Speaker 2
I'm like, hey, you guys got that Kurt Cobain t shirt? Because it wasn't out. And there was one girl that worked there, and she went to the back and brought it out and just gave it to me. So for me, being from, I felt like I'm. Like I'm stealing. Am I going to get in trouble? Because for me, no one was giving you a discus sweatshirt at models. No one was giving you shit for free. Or at hot wax. Hot wax off Jamaica Ave. Where I used to buy records. They weren't giving you no free records. Matter of fact, they charge you more. If you wanted to buy the record a week early. If the record came out on Tuesday, they'd have it on Thursday. So you get to have it for the weekend and bump it. And they charge you more. They charge you $20 instead of $15. So, like, getting this free stuff, you know what I mean? But again, forget the fact that it was free. It was like people putting images, copy words, lyrics, colors, things on clothing from the life that we were living in real time. So many examples of that.

[00:34:39.210] - Speaker 2
There's a couple of pieces I still have, and one of them is super influential in my work. Like, there's this brand called sir ran by this guy named Russ, and he did this thing where he did an M 65 and a sweatshirt, and one sweatshirt was black Jesus. One sweatshirt was white Jesus. And you could buy whichever one you wanted to buy. Whatever, right? And to me, I was like, fuck. This is like an art concept. This is not just clothing. This is like creating a conversation. It's also even creating a choice. And it's creating conversation to vote. You get to vote. And then when you wear it, if you get the black Jesus one, there was a visceral reaction. Negative, positive, whatever, wearing that. And I bought the black Jesus one. My man vito held it for me until it went on sale. And that's the first thing I ever got from union. And I remember wearing that on a train. Whether I was walking by some Israelites or this or that person, old black ladies, white people. People just would comment on it, right. Because it wasn't normal to see something like that on clothing, something that had that type of statement on it.

[00:35:53.970] - Speaker 1
It was confrontational.

[00:35:55.820] - Speaker 2
Yeah. And what I found interesting about it was the statement was not clear. For all we know, Russ could be like, this is a joke. This is comedy. We don't know.

[00:36:08.310] - Speaker 1
We have no idea.

[00:36:09.160] - Speaker 2
But because he left it ambiguous, then you get all these reactions for people.

[00:36:17.340] - Speaker 1
It becomes more about the viewer than it becomes about the art.

[00:36:21.150] - Speaker 2
Exactly.

[00:36:21.640] - Speaker 1
The art is the starter of the conversation.

[00:36:24.530] - Speaker 2
Exactly. But it doesn't finish you know, I held on to that piece of sweatshirt. That shirt went from me from Jamaica, Queens, to Greenpoint in Brooklyn, where I lived. And then I moved to London. Mark Jacobs. I was a sales associate there. Started off as a stock guy. They moved me to London, to LA, back to New York, literally over the course of 20 years. That sweatshirt is one of my talisman because there are certain items I've collected. I have a lot of stuff in general, but there's just certain couple of items that were like, I keep them for reasons beyond esthetics of how it looks in my house or on my body, what it makes me think about.

[00:37:12.120] - Speaker 1
What was your first job in fashion?

[00:37:15.050] - Speaker 2
My first job was a sales associate at J. Crew in the year 2000, not far from the Virgin records, over by 14th street. That's where I used to spend my lunch break, going in there, listening to music.

[00:37:29.150] - Speaker 1
Everyone who worked in the stores that you've mentioned, were they all club kids?

[00:37:35.390] - Speaker 2
Damn, that's a good, great question. And yeah, that was the thing. Club kids was like work, retail. Why not? Because you made a lot of money, but you could have that late shift, so you could be out all night, still get some sleep, because there's the two shifts. So there's a JQ shift where you come in at one and you work like one to eight or something like that. Or like twelve to eight. So that was a part of it. No, loads of club kids worked retail. That was always the thing. Even before my era. Probably a couple of eras before that. Yeah. Worked at J. Crew, then worked at Bergdolf Goodman as a stock guy in Saks, then went back, worked at Grady's liquor store in Jamaica, Queens, and then got a job at Kate Spade, stock guy. And then I got the job at Mark Jacobs, which that was the first job of my life that I wanted.

[00:38:34.690] - Speaker 1
The others were jobs to support yourself. And then Marc Jacobs was the start of what you wanted to do.

[00:38:41.900] - Speaker 2
Yeah, that's the first job I wanted that I got. I wanted to work at union, but Marriott, they wouldn't hire me. But, yeah, got the job at Marc Jacobs. And I remember I got that job. I knew it would change my life because I knew it was a place of confluence. And I knew from reading books that if you hang around places that have the same values or the things that you're into and the people that care about the same stuff you care about, hang around stuff can happen.

[00:39:16.420] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Opportunities arise. Like minded community.

[00:39:19.280] - Speaker 2
And it trickled down from Mark because he's a cool dude and he was a club kid, he was hanging out at studio 54 area, working. He started off working at retail. Forget the name of the store. Uptown, which is also the same store where he sold his first pieces of clothing, was the same store he was a stock guy at.

[00:39:37.800] - Speaker 1
Wow.

[00:39:38.460] - Speaker 2
So I was obsessed with Mark Jacobs clothing, and I thought he was a cool character, you know what I mean? I thought he seemed like a cool dude from the tidbits of information I can get on him from magazines. So I used to always go to the Marc Jacobs collection store and check out the clothing. Yeah, I got lucky. Very cool person by the name of Hadara. She reached out and seen her. I first met her. So here's the thing. I first met her at the store union years before. And then I remember I ran into her.

[00:40:14.580] - Speaker 1
We were talking.

[00:40:15.250] - Speaker 2
She's like, sorry, I want to talk with you. I got to run. I got to go to Shabbas. And I imagine her seeing me might have put me in her mind and sent me an email like, hey, would you be interested interviewing at Mark Jacobs? And my other friend Adam had tried to get me a job there. It didn't work. I didn't even get an interview. And then Hadar had just become manager there, I think, or something. And she got me an interview. And then I had three interviews with Debbie, who's the store manager, Susie, who's the head of HR, and then Robert Duffy, who started the company with Mark Jacobs. He was the president in 1985, and Robert was so deep, he interviewed every person I was interviewing for the stock position.

[00:40:59.750] - Speaker 1
Wow.

[00:41:00.240] - Speaker 2
And he was the president of Mark Jacobs.

[00:41:02.170] - Speaker 1
Tells you a lot about the care in the company. If the head of the company meets every single employee, it's an unusual company.

[00:41:12.140] - Speaker 2
Exactly, yeah. That care reflected in the staffing and the music. They let us play whatever music we want at the store, which is unheard of in retail. We're playing Lil Wayne mixtapes or people playing peaches fuck the pain away, you know what I mean? We're playing all kinds of stuff there. It was funny. That always requires arguments, though, within the staff, because it was like people were fighting for that ipod time, you know what I mean? People wanted to put their music on, but it was fun because I learned so much more that took my music knowledge to the next level.

[00:41:47.800] - Speaker 1
Just because it was a wide variety of people played music.

[00:41:50.640] - Speaker 2
Yeah, because it was this amazing blender of kids who are from New York or moved to New York club kids, art kids. That's the first time I met artists, was working at, you know, people that, whether they went to art school or self taught artists. I mean, my dad's an artist, but I didn't even realize my dad was an artist. I'm like, look at my dad's, like, he's a cameraman. It's a technical job. He's artist. But far as me not meeting someone the same age as me, that's the first time I ever met artists. That was 2006, so I was already in my early 20s. That's the first time I met someone who made stuff that wasn't music.

[00:42:34.930] - Speaker 1
When you're a kid, you don't meet artists.

[00:42:37.750] - Speaker 2
No.

[00:42:39.170] - Speaker 1
It's interesting. You think it's this rare breed of person that's different, and it's not. We're just not around them.

[00:42:46.860] - Speaker 2
We're just not around them. Exactly. And so I was meeting these kids who make art, all types of different types of art. I remember my friend. He's still my friend to this day. He was at my wedding. One of my best friends, James Corrigan, he's from Boston, was a graffiti writer. Now he's a musician. But we had the Secret Santa, so it's my first year at Mark Jacobs. So he pulled out my name, and he bought me the autobiography of Miles Davis. And that changed my life, reading that book. I never read a book so fast. And once I got out of New York, I took that book, and that was another one of my talismans. I took that book with me wherever I went, even when I traveled for a long time. It was like my Linus blanket, because Miles is a dynamic, as, you know, dynamic character. But I learned so much from that book about trusting your gut. And it was like that book gave me my spidey sense because I read the autobiography, Miles Davis. When I met certain friends, mentors, I was like, I got to hang out on this guy.

[00:44:02.590] - Speaker 2
My spidey synths started tingling. This is like when Miles met Gil Evans. You know what I mean? This is my version of Gil Evans. I got to hang out with this guy and do stuff with him. Yes. So that book I read through, and it's interesting because my dad always told me to read autobiographies. He said that, tremaine, if you want to figure out where to go in life, you should read autobiographies. Not because it'll tell you what to do, but it'll show you what you just said. These people seem so grandiose and special. They're just humans. They go through same things. Maybe they got lucky. Maybe they seized the opportunity, whatever it is. But you see like, oh, this isn't as far as I think it is. Not the fame, not the money, no.

[00:44:52.990] - Speaker 1
Doing the art. The art part.

[00:44:54.990] - Speaker 2
You know what I mean?

[00:44:56.130] - Speaker 1
And the fact that you didn't pick the book, that it was given to you, it's interesting. It's like the fact that you had tried to get the job at Marc Jacobs and didn't get it when you tried, but then you get a call from a friend. The universe plays a role in all these things that happen where something.

[00:45:15.690] - Speaker 2
Yeah, definitely.

[00:45:16.500] - Speaker 1
Something's going on. It's not like we have to make it happen. It doesn't work that way. Well, so much of it's out of our control.

[00:45:24.060] - Speaker 2
No, straight up. And that's the thing where I got really fortunate. And I'm grateful to this day with my parents, and I'll keep always, long as I live, go back to them. Because my dad used to, I'd be brushing my teeth in the bathroom. He'd walk in the bathroom and be like, there's an art to brushing your teeth, jermaine. There's an art to everything. Trust me. And then he'd walk out the bathroom.

[00:45:49.490] - Speaker 1
Your dad sounds like a buddhist monk.

[00:45:52.110] - Speaker 2
Yeah. Nah, a little bit. Or like, he used to sit me down and have me watch Joseph Campbell with him.

[00:45:57.970] - Speaker 1
Wow.

[00:45:58.530] - Speaker 2
Power of myth.

[00:45:59.390] - Speaker 1
Beautiful.

[00:45:59.780] - Speaker 2
Whenever that was on PBS.

[00:46:01.030] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[00:46:01.590] - Speaker 2
He never made me do things.

[00:46:03.220] - Speaker 1
He invited you?

[00:46:04.370] - Speaker 2
Invited me. And then we talk about the hero's journey. My dad had me watch Joseph Campbell when I'm a teenager, and then me as a young man getting the book from James, and then me knowing about the hero's journey. And then I'm like, I see the hero's journey in Miles's life, and then I see that everyone lives the hero's journey. It's not about if you become this great jazz player, garbage man, whatever your walk of life is, it's all important, and it's all meaningless. Equally meaningless. And we all have a journey, and there's different, like a party. Hero's journey is when you meet the mentor. Everyone's going to meet the mentor. Whether you want to listen and humble yourself to be an apprentice, that's going to change your journey. It just is, you know what? And, you know, for me, there was a couple people. One of them is my friend know Hadara was a mentor. She. I learned a lot about art from, like, I learned a little bit about art from my parents. And they had, like, andy Warhol's diary on their bookshelf next to James Baldwin, the fire. Next time and I read and looked at those books and then started hanging out with h, became friends and started dating after that through working together at Mark Jacobs.

[00:47:28.980] - Speaker 2
And she taught me a lot about art and exposed me to a lot of things that I wasn't exposed to, you know what? You know? So she was a friend mentor for a time, and then to this. Know my boy, a side. He's a friend mentor, and learned so much about music, life. And really, maybe the best thing I learned from a side is, like, willpower, just seeing the things he's gone through and to be where he's at now. So that was another amazing thing, too, is, like, me being given these things and I take them for granted. I treated Mark Jacobs and Robert moving me to London to work at the Marc Jacobs collection store. I treated getting that book from James the same way.

[00:48:17.360] - Speaker 1
Was it your first time in London when you got the job?

[00:48:19.390] - Speaker 2
It was first time out of America. Never had a passport.

[00:48:22.740] - Speaker 1
And what was that experience like?

[00:48:24.440] - Speaker 2
Incredible, man. They moved me to London in 2010. I lived there till 2000, almost 2018.

[00:48:32.110] - Speaker 1
Wow. I didn't know that.

[00:48:33.400] - Speaker 2
Yeah, probably when we first met each other, I was still transversing between London and LA.

[00:48:37.000] - Speaker 1
I see.

[00:48:37.770] - Speaker 2
And I worked for Mark Jacobs from 2006 to 2015. Started off at the England Greenwich village West village store, ended up in the Mount street store.

[00:48:46.970] - Speaker 1
Always on the retail side.

[00:48:48.300] - Speaker 2
Yeah, always on the retail side. And London was great, man. It took my knowledge of culture. It expanded it. It just expanded my world, man. Just learned so much there. And I still employ things I've learned from my time in London and the stuff I make and also just my life. It's so different because, okay, America is great, but if you drive or get on a plane for hour and a half, you're in Philly's a great town, whereas if you get on a plane or drive for hour and a half in London, you're in Italy or you're in Paris on the Eurostar. So it was affordable, and I'd squeezed the hell out of my weekends and vacations.

[00:49:40.570] - Speaker 1
Get on a train and go anywhere fast.

[00:49:43.320] - Speaker 2
And also you got six weeks of vacation. Where in America, you start off with like four days or a week you had to earn up and you could top out at two weeks, where customary off rip. In Europe you get six weeks. But then, besides, that was meeting a side.

[00:50:02.910] - Speaker 1
Tell me about a side. I don't know anything about him.

[00:50:05.620] - Speaker 2
One of my best friends, and just, he's a musician, producer, dj, and he's hilarious, and he's just like one of the most well read people I've ever met in my life. And he's just like a potluck of knowledge. And know, you meet some people and they're like, okay. They're all esthetic. Where Aceide. It's like, yeah, I'm really into punk and Vivian Westwood and all that stuff. But then also I read please kill me in all those books and all those things, too. This is not just like the look. It's the thing that made the look that he researches intensely. He owns 10,000 records, like any great DJ owns. I've noticed this thing. Every great DJ owns. That's the thing. You own 10,000 of the right records? Yeah, we met at a party, and he was smoking a cigar, and I smoked cigars, and I never saw people in my age bracket smoke cigars. So that's why I just went up to him and said, oh, I never really. Also, I was new in London. I'm like, those are Cubans. So you can't really get Cubans in America legally where you can in London. I was like, are you smoking a cuban?

[00:51:23.070] - Speaker 2
He's like, yeah. And then he's like, yeah. I just came back. I was visiting Cuba, and he gave me a cuban cigar, took my number, and that's how we became friends. The first time we hung out, came to this place, I was just astounded by the way his place looked and all the books and records he had. And I remember he gave me. He did a thing with the artist, Chris O'Feely. They did a charity thing. So they had some leftover artworks that Chris had done for the charity. I knew Chris O'Feely was because of the sensation show in Brooklyn that Giuliani tried to shut down, where it was Chris O'Philly, Damien Hurst, all these artists, and he did the Madonna with the cow dung on it.

[00:52:10.040] - Speaker 1
The point about going to somebody's place and seeing their record collection and book collection and how you feel. Like it makes sense for me to be friends with this person.

[00:52:20.780] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[00:52:21.790] - Speaker 1
Like, he lives in a way different than many people, but in a way that you would feel comfortable living.

[00:52:27.020] - Speaker 2
Exactly. I think you become friends with people that remind you of the positive things from your childhood, but also maybe show you the opportunities that you didn't have or see or knew were possible in your childhood. So it's the thing in the past and the future, and that's usually the people that I think become your best friends or mentors you become tight with. AC gave me this thing, and it was just like, this is 2010. I'm a sales associate, Mark Jacobs and someone's given me something not just of value but meaningful to them. Crystal Philly is amazing artists. And it was like just something people didn't do. You know what I mean? People just didn't just do stuff just to do like there's no know. And that was interesting to me. And we became friends. And then like a year later he said to me once, hey, I think if I dj and you host the parties it could be good. Because he said what made him want to do that was one day he came to hang out with me at Mark Jacobs and a customer came in and he said, he's observing. She seemed quite like staunch or quite curt.

[00:53:50.960] - Speaker 2
And he said by the end of me working with her, he said I totally like, I don't know, this is his opinion. Broken her down and she's like, Tremaine, can't wait to come see you again. This and a third. He's like, this guy's be a good partner for me in doing stuff. So we started doing parties and honestly everything I do now creatively, business wise, the seed of it was besides other stuff before meeting Aesop, but also me and him connecting and doing those parties. Through that, doing those parties, I became friends and met and started working with Serge Becker, working with Frank Ocean, became friends with Virgil, Benji B. Jude and Benji B. From deviation. I met kayas my first week in London. Became friends. So that's what happened in London. I met all these really good people but also culturally astute people. So they were just great decent human beings but also had cultural know. My friend Graham Erickson, the list goes know Martin Rose, Grace Wells Bonner. So many people. London was just like I really cut my teeth. Far as jettisoning from working retail. I worked retail from age 1920 to age 33, 34, you know what I mean?

[00:55:21.480] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Do you think it had a positive effect working retail? Did that inform your understanding of the world?

[00:55:28.250] - Speaker 2
Yeah, I think it did. It was great. One of the main things was the bookmark the bookstore that Marc Jacobs and Robert started when I worked in the west Village. The bookstore was there and I would hang out there on my lunch breaks and stuff like that. I never worked there as a social associate. And Jen Baker who was the curator for the bookstore. This had amazing books, man. I learned so know a lot of them. I didn't buy because I didn't have the money back then. But I remember all of them and I buy them continuously. I'm like continuously buying all the books. I didn't buy from the bookmark store. When I moved to London, there was a little bookmark section there. Matter of fact, Frank, on that blonded radio, the Iceman episode, he has a freestyle, and he sings about that time in London, me and him hanging out. Frank would come to the store and we'd hang out and just be kicking it in front of the books and going through the books and stuff like that. Then after I get off work, he'd wait for me to get off work and we go hang out at Scott's, the fish restaurant, and eat.

[00:56:39.250] - Speaker 2
And then sometimes the conversation would continue that we're having in the book section of the Mark Jacobs store. This is back in 2013, twelve, when me and him met, became cool. And then I started working with him on boys don't cry magazine and blonde. Yeah, working in retail. The best part was those books. That's it. But then also just the people I met.

[00:57:05.750] - Speaker 1
Do you feel like you got any understanding of the consumer or was it not about that?

[00:57:12.010] - Speaker 2
Yeah, I became a pretty good Sales associate. But what I think set me apart from your typical sales associate, and not just me, other people, too, at Mark Jacobs, compared to other stores. The era of retail, which is very different than the era of retail now. I tell a woman, you shouldn't buy that dress.

[00:57:32.470] - Speaker 1
It's not for you.

[00:57:33.970] - Speaker 2
That's what I learned. And people respect that because you're honest.

[00:57:37.860] - Speaker 1
And it's so rare.

[00:57:39.290] - Speaker 2
And you might make less money commission that day, but you end up having.

[00:57:43.270] - Speaker 1
A customer because you're credible.

[00:57:45.600] - Speaker 2
Yeah, exactly. So, man, I just saw Mark on the design side. Him and his team take so many chances season after season. He had his motifs that he went back to, but he'd do left turns.

[00:58:04.970] - Speaker 1
Would you say fearless creatively?

[00:58:07.350] - Speaker 2
Yeah, I believe so. Fearless. And there'd be shows that he were heralded, there'd be shows that he was panned and he just kept it. And I think he didn't bask in the applause and he didn't soak in the booze. And I learned that from watching him and his team. I saw him use the keys to the house at Louis Vuitton and his own company, Martin Jacobs, to put forth the things he loved and culture through the clothing to people. So it felt like sharing. I remember the first Marc Jacobs show I went to at the armory. Sonic Youth was just playing in the middle of the show with the malls, walking around. Now you see that all the time. But back then, 2006, that wasn't the typical thing for a fashion show. It was just cool as fucking. After parties always be dope. I remember one after party had Diplo and Mia DJing and performing, but it was before either one of them blew. It was just like right there. And I was just always. So I took so many notes. Also having the high low having when you put intention into something. So if there's a little plastic coin purse that costs $25 or if it's a chinchilla coin purse that costs 2500, but if you put the intention to it, they're actually worth the same thing and they cost different prices because of what it costs to make them and markups and all that stuff.

[00:59:44.840] - Speaker 2
But actually the intention makes them equal. And the customer, you can actually teach the customer that and guide the customer that you can buy this thing and this thing. And neither is just the quality is.

[01:00:00.110] - Speaker 1
In both of them. Yeah, one just has a different.

[01:00:03.970] - Speaker 2
And, you know, I saw Mark do that thing, that high low thing through different categories and different things. Even like something that's quite customary now is brands doing collaborations? He wasn't the first to do it. I think he might have caught that from hanging out in Japan, but was like Mark Jacobs and collaborations with vans or other things, those were huge back in the day, back in 2005 and four, the Vans collab. And just also seeing the thing. My favorite thing to do, and I've learned from seeing other artists do it, is putting the right thing in the wrong place. Putting the right thing in a place that people wouldn't expect to see it.

[01:00:52.910] - Speaker 1
Changing the context around something. Yeah, to make it something new.

[01:00:56.660] - Speaker 2
Make it something new and you actually don't even know what it will. So, yeah, definitely working at MJ, learned so much also my other gigs too. Learned a lot. The customer knows when you're sure of yourself, they might not even be able to enunciate that it's something, maybe subconscious.

[01:01:15.820] - Speaker 1
But they know sure yourself is interesting because when you're sure yourself, it's only what you think. It doesn't mean you're right, but you're true to yourself.

[01:01:25.230] - Speaker 2
Yeah. Like people ask me, let's say I put out something, collection or something, and people leaving comments, they don't like it or do like it almost 99% of the time. I don't respond to either. Not saying I'm some stoic and it doesn't affect me, but in the end, I don't control how you feel about it after I make it.

[01:01:47.480] - Speaker 1
Yeah, and you're making the thing you want to make. You're not making it really for them. You're making it for you.

[01:01:53.410] - Speaker 2
Exactly.

[01:01:54.130] - Speaker 1
And they can go for the ride or not. That's up to them.

[01:01:56.920] - Speaker 2
Yeah, exactly.

[01:01:59.030] - Speaker 1
Has nothing to do with you really, how they react.

[01:02:02.170] - Speaker 2
Yeah, because art isn't like a boxing match where if you knock someone out, it's like, even if they didn't want you to win, you knocked the person out. You won the fight. Art's more so, like, when it goes the distance and the judges are like, who won? Or Ali or Frazier. It's all interpretation. Like, Ali, if he didn't knock out George Foreman, maybe he probably would have lost that fight. Probably so on points. Yeah, right.

[01:02:32.160] - Speaker 1
Well, he got beat up the whole fight.

[01:02:33.830] - Speaker 2
Yeah, that's what I'm saying. He got beat up. Exactly. So it's kind of like similar to that with making stuff. And that's why artists should be remiss to not get caught up in the validation index.

[01:02:51.030] - Speaker 1
How do you think you learned that?

[01:02:53.510] - Speaker 2
I've learned that over time again. My mom and dad, my mom always, and dad lucky always very grateful. And lucky always telling me, like, do not care what people think. My dad, mom used to tell me, filter even what we say and choose what's right for you.

[01:03:11.440] - Speaker 1
Wow.

[01:03:12.030] - Speaker 2
But I have to keep reminding myself.

[01:03:13.740] - Speaker 1
That, because real wisdom, the world we.

[01:03:16.370] - Speaker 2
Live in can take you away from that.

[01:03:19.600] - Speaker 1
Definitely.

[01:03:20.260] - Speaker 2
So you have to keep. It's a practice. None of these things, these totems that I've built in my mind, they're not permanent. They're only permanent if I practice them.

[01:03:29.300] - Speaker 1
Yeah. It's easy to slip into the mind meld going on outside of ourselves if we're not careful.

[01:03:37.870] - Speaker 2
Yeah. An example of that is, someone who reminded me of that was Jassen, formerly known as most deaf we're talking about. I did a collection based off Alvin Ailey, and I worked with his estate and licensed images and copy, and Yasin called me. He's like, yo, man, I'm really proud of you. I love this collection you've done. I said, yeah, man, I did it because the world needs to know. People should know about Alvin Ailey as much as they know about Michael Jordan. And then Yasin's like, how do you know that was his validation index? World acknowledgement on the level of a Michael Jordan? Maybe he was happy with just the people who were into his art were into it, and the people that weren't, weren't. And he stopped me dead in my tracks on the phone. I was like, yo, you're right. So I don't need to do the collection so that more everyone knows and thinks Alvin Ailey is important and see him in the light, they need to be sinned. I just need to do it because I think he's great. That's it.

[01:04:42.220] - Speaker 1
And that's all you can it. You know, it's like, this is what's interesting to me.

[01:04:47.260] - Speaker 2
Yeah. And once you get into the. Trying to push the thing, it becomes something else. It's something else, and it kind of taints it. Absolutely. For yourself.

[01:04:57.940] - Speaker 1
It's not pure anymore. Yeah, it's not pure anymore. If it has some. Trying to do some work in the world, it's not like that. You can make something, and it can take on a political significance in the world, but usually when that happens, it has nothing to do with what your intention was in making it. That happens. If it's meant to happen, you can't control that, because otherwise it feels like it's propaganda. It's something else.

[01:05:24.980] - Speaker 2
Yeah, I design many things, but there's this one piece of design that's quite popular, and it's a cotton wreath. And there's a loud minority of people who are saying, oh, this is profiting off of black trauma. And then there's people who are saying they think it's beautiful, right? And they think, this is amazing. But my truth and my intention was, it makes me feel good. That's it. Because for me, I'm like. I see in other cultures, like, let's say certain cultures, they have, like, a family crest, a symbol or words. And that crest might have things from where the family comes from, let's say, like, something celtic. And they were farmers or they were masons or whatever that might be in the crest or something like that. So for me, I'm like, everyone in my family's first job was picking cotton. And before that, when we were slaves, we picked cotton. That was one of the things slaves were used to do to pick cotton. That's the thing that built this country and built capitalism. And then it's like Joseph Campbell. The word religio religion comes from the latin word religio, which is the return to.

[01:06:39.890] - Speaker 2
And he speaks a lot about the circle, the returning to, even a wedding ring. That's why people wear wedding rings. The connecting all that. And it all started connecting to me. And I started making these different art pieces, static art pieces. Cotton reef, black Jesus, black majana. Working with the pan african flag, flipping polo motifs to put the black gaze on something someone will call a white institution. Put the black gaze on it. I was making all these things, and then I said, oh, you know, I'm going to make a clothing line and I'm going to take these art pieces and apply them to stuff.

[01:07:26.370] - Speaker 1
But that came second. It started with the art. Yeah, just made the art.

[01:07:30.340] - Speaker 2
Just made the art. But the thing is, did you make.

[01:07:33.010] - Speaker 1
The art with an idea of showing it or just to make it?

[01:07:36.290] - Speaker 2
I showed it a couple times. Like, I showed it in London with this artist and someone has become a good friend, theasta Gates. He had a thing doing freeze, and I showed the reef. And actually it was a coffin that was covered with the pan african flag, which was done by David Hammonds in 1990, which was based off Marcus Garvey's pan african flag from 1920. So I made a version of it. I had a coffin built and put the coffin with the flag over it and then the reef on top of the coffin. And, yeah, that's one of my first pieces I made and showed it in London. And then Virgil's mid career show in Atlanta Art Institute, we had a collaborative piece and then I had a piece of work called demo one that I showed there. And then I actually got a couple of pieces of the clothing stuff in the Met permanent collection.

[01:08:38.030] - Speaker 1
Wow.

[01:08:38.380] - Speaker 2
But so cool.

[01:08:40.390] - Speaker 1
Yeah, but the clothing came after the after.

[01:08:42.870] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[01:08:43.700] - Speaker 1
Inspired by almost like the merch for the art.

[01:08:46.730] - Speaker 2
Exactly. I was making the pieces. And even now, whenever I have a new collection or new thing, I build it in my head on mood boards. Sometimes physically as an art project. The whole denim tears thing is an art project. And I just felt that clothing was to get the ideas out. I just felt the art world. It's cool and I appreciate it. Too removed, too removed, too limited. Like the last two years, they do this thing called Farmers Day. So me and Andy drove down there, saw a bunch of old friends. You've probably seen it before. You know the rock on Farmers Boulevard? That red, black and green rock? You know it? And ll's take legendary pictures in front of there. They do a barbecue around there. It's a big block party around the rock. They've been doing it last two years, so I missed it. The first couple of years. I went with Andy and we're hanging out. My man smart came and met us and I was like, let's get some food. And the line was super long to get food from the barbecue. So I was like, hey, we're going to go over about 40 projects to this fish spot.

[01:10:00.370] - Speaker 2
So we're driving along the white wall and I see a kid wearing these jeans. I did. And that was the whole point. The fact that I'm seeing a young man wearing a pair of jeans in my old neighborhood. I couldn't get that. You made that? I made. I couldn't get that from the art world. Yeah, I get it on someone's wall.

[01:10:27.060] - Speaker 1
But that guy, it's different.

[01:10:28.940] - Speaker 2
That guy that owned the art piece, he'd have to transverse all he'd have to transverse all the worlds. I've transversed to even maybe be able to afford or even know. Forget the money. It's just about. If, you know, that's the first step to acquiring something or acquiring knowledge.

[01:10:46.130] - Speaker 1
Yes.

[01:10:46.750] - Speaker 2
So, yeah, just seeing that young dude on his four wheel, also kind of.

[01:10:52.080] - Speaker 1
A punk rock idea or hip hop idea as well, of like, taking it out of the conservatory and bringing it back to the street, it's like, this is where we are. This is ours. It's for us. This is not meant to be in an institution. It could be there. Know, when something related to hip hop ends up in an institution, it's always interesting to me, but that's not why it was made.

[01:11:18.980] - Speaker 2
Yeah, Jay Z didn't write those lyrics and make those songs to end up at the Brooklyn library. No, it's cool that it did.

[01:11:25.280] - Speaker 1
It's cool that it did. But that's not what it's about. Yeah, that's not what never about.

[01:11:30.120] - Speaker 2
You know, he had to get the stuff out of his head. He wanted to get out the streets, but he also still wanted to do something that meant something to him. And he had this talent that he developed. It's like if you watch Star wars, yeah, you could be born with the force, but you have to develop it. You have to work your ass off. Not even just work your ass off, become fearless. Because the strongest JEdi's are the fearless ones. Not the ones who train the most, not the ones who are the fastest or the strongest. The strongest artists are the ones that lack the most amount of fear, not the ones that went to Yale for painting. I'm not knocking that. One of my favorite painters went to Yale for painting. JeNnifeR Packer. But I'm saying, in the end, what really makes an artist great is how much fear do you lack? A lot of the fear for artists starts coming in once the success happens or if the success doesn't happen. So that's the funny thing about success and not having success. It can give you the same thing if you don't have the success, react either way.

[01:12:32.690] - Speaker 1
You react instead of acting.

[01:12:34.670] - Speaker 2
Yeah. So you could be like, okay, I'm making stuff and I'm fearless. It's working. Damn. Should I keep making the same old, same old stuff? Because I don't want to not keep being successful. You let fear creep in, and you're going to get weaker if you're making stuff and it's not selling or you're not getting the validation or attention you want. Oh, maybe I should start making different stuff. Maybe I should make stuff like the guy, like JEff Coons, because he's successful. You're letting fear Creep in and you're getting weaker. It's the same thing. And being fearless doesn't mean you don't feel fear. It's just knowing that you have to.

[01:13:12.510] - Speaker 1
Walk through it and knowing that your purpose is to express yourself. That's what it is. It's about self expression. This is the thing I want to make. Yeah, check it out.

[01:13:24.420] - Speaker 2
Yeah. And that applies to everything who you partner with. It's all choice. And not letting those choices be tainted by the judgments of the tRibe.

[01:13:38.370] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Or expectations.

[01:13:39.740] - Speaker 2
Expectations of the tribe.

[01:13:41.910] - Speaker 1
When did you first feel like you found your tribe?

[01:13:45.770] - Speaker 2
I think I first felt like that hanging out at union, other people who.

[01:13:52.830] - Speaker 1
Were different from everyone else, but more like you.

[01:13:55.370] - Speaker 2
Yeah. You're hanging out at union. And then my friend Nigel and my friend Dre from my neighborhood, and they're both older than me because they definitely saw me. They saw me. But I remember one of my friends, they're like, yo, you be hanging out in the village and stuff and hanging out downtown, you know, there's gay people there. Like, super provincial. Like, just like, you know, there's gay people down there. I was like, n. I have no problem issues with homosexuals. You know what I mean? I don't even consider them. They're humans. I don't even delineate. It's interesting, the myths that humans create. That's what separates us from other animals, humans ability to create. So, like, I remember my friend was like, man, I don't hang out in the city because the food's more expensive there. I'm like, not everywhere. There's a place called lovely day that I go to. I said, I spend less money at lovely day than you guys spend at BBQ's. And the food's better for me. You know what I mean? And he's like, yeah, they charge more money at the gap out there. I'm like, no, my girlfriend Kenya, she works at the gap.

[01:15:07.880] - Speaker 2
The prices are the same across. But he's creating this myth because of this fear that he has of being out of, you know. And that's something I learned about from my parents because they didn't have that know. My dad told me about one of his fishing buddies. The only time that guy left Long island was when his wife got said, I don't mess with the city, I don't mess with. And I was always just like. I found it really interesting. It's a choice, though, people that just stay where they're at when they don't have to and not see other things or learn other things. So I say that to say, those were my brothers and my friends, but I met them through circumstance of moving there because there were other people I could have hung out with. So we chose each other. But there was a wall for me because they were afraid to go and experience other things, whether it be food, music, people. And I wasn't. So that put a limit on how far our friendship could go, in my opinion. Not how far our friendship could go, but just like the time we could spend.

[01:16:26.410] - Speaker 2
Because I'm not going to not go there because you're trying to make me afraid of hanging out in the village or hanging out in Soho or hanging out anywhere. So that's why when I went to union, especially when I met guys like Angelo and Wilkins, they were guys from the outer boroughs. Now all the kids come and hang out downtown. That wasn't a thing. We all hung out and met up there. And so if you saw someone that dressed like you or looked like you downtown, you'd be like, what's up? Because, you know, they transversed the same terrain. To get there.

[01:17:07.430] - Speaker 1
Click on it.

[01:17:09.110] - Speaker 2
Literally far as sitting on a train for an hour. And if you're going to hang out late, you're going to be on that train for an hour and a half or waiting for that train for an hour to get back to Queens. But also psychologically transversing the terrain of your tribe, maybe being like, why are you going out there? Who do you think? You? Yeah, that was the first time the tribe was hanging out at union, I think me and catch over there tell.

[01:17:37.110] - Speaker 1
Me the story of denim tears.

[01:17:39.970] - Speaker 2
Well, the story goes back to the name came from inside joke. Just back in like, 2013 or 14. Me, Virgil aside, Benji B. Kaius and Sam Ross were at a dinner before there was this place called addition hotel. So the first hotel they opened, I think, was that in London. This guy named Sepchu a R dude, an amazing, legendary London DJ. He ran a night in the basement at the addition. So at that time, what we do is if V was in Paris, I'd hit V. Like, yo, they'll get your. Your star ticket and pay 200 pounds to DJ. Whatever, right? Whenever you were using Paris or something, then I'd be like, yo, Benji got v coming out AsaP. V's coming out. Let's do a night even. We had a crew. It was called us still. So anyway, they give us a free dinner. So we were having dinner before the gig. I had this pair of 1954 repro Levi's denim that I bought when I first moved to London. Because when I first moved to London, my moving bonus was a month's paycheck. So I bought this really expensive pair of denim with that money.

[01:18:57.610] - Speaker 2
And I wore them every day for years. So they eventually got torn and ripped to shit.

[01:19:02.500] - Speaker 1
And then I've seen you wear those. Yeah, I've seen them torn.

[01:19:06.410] - Speaker 2
Yeah, you've seen them. So I posted this thing on Instagram where I would just post images of things and people post selfies, right? And I always thought it was quite funny, like, you're posting a picture of yourself, but cool. So I was trolling. So I'd post things that gave the emotion of what I was feeling, but not a picture of me. It'd be different things. And I just hashtag always. And it always would be things that only five people understood the joke or the emotion. So I posted those jeans. The back pocket looked like something. So then after dinner, a side and Kaius, or Kaius and Virgil, they brought up that post and they're like, yeah, you posted the ripped denim. And then someone said, like, your denim was crying or something like that. And then maybe Kaius or someone or a side said, denim tears. I said, oh, that sounds like an R b group. So we're just cracking jokes. So then the next day, Virgil wrote he had a blog on style where he would recap his travels. So he wrote like, yeah, we had dinner and we had a party with Kai's pawson of Young Turks fame, Benji b of Deviation fame, a side of Nike marketing he had this night he used to do.

[01:20:23.580] - Speaker 2
He wrote that. And then he said, and then him, tears of Mark Jacobs fame. He's just trolling me. We're joking. And so then from that moment, I just changed my handle. So when we did parties, I put them tears. So it would be me and a side doing parties or Virgil Pyrex vision a side and denim tears. So I started from that, but then the way my mind works is like, okay, inside joke. And then I was like, denim tears. That kind of human experience is kind of like a pair of jeans. You start off brand new and then the attrition of life makes rips, physically and psychologically. So then I was like, oh, that's what denim tears means now. So I gave it a different meaning. So then it became. It meant, like, the human condition. And so denim tears, the brand is about a part of the human condition, which is the plight and glory of the. You know, some of the stories I tell about are about history of cotton, some of the stories about Alvin Ailey, some of the stories about Windrush. I mean, I designed a collection based off, there's this dude.

[01:21:34.950] - Speaker 2
He had a tiger in his apartment in Harlem. You ever heard that story? There's a dude?

[01:21:40.610] - Speaker 1
No.

[01:21:41.040] - Speaker 2
In the mid 2000s, he had a tiger in his apartment in Harlem named Ming. And this guy was obsessed with animals, and he raised a full grown tiger in his apartment. And then it was a huge. It was one of the biggest stories in New York that year. So I'm thinking, I'm like, okay, what am I going to design the next collection to? There's, like, great imagery I can create off that, but also, that's just an interesting story. It's a story of a guy in the hood with a tiger. That's insane and also amazing. And I talked to the guy, interviewed him, and designed a whole collection based off that, about him and Ming, tiger of Harlem. I remember someone texting me, like, I love the Ming collection. I'm like, yeah. I said, I tell zany black stories too. You know what mean? So, because that's a zany ass story. I got a collection coming out called Kiss my grits, which is what my mom used to tell me when I annoy her. She'd be like, kiss my grits. The collection is about black food, about the foods I grew up eating in Harlem, Georgia, and in New York.

[01:22:50.500] - Speaker 1
Tell me the scale of a collection. How small can it be? And how big can it be?

[01:22:54.600] - Speaker 2
It could be like my collection I did with Dior. There's probably 50 different items, maybe not what made it to retail, but, like, in the show that happened in Egypt, there's probably, like 80 items, maybe more. But then there's collections. Like, I did a collection based off growing up in Jamaica, Queens, and the rock with Stussy. And that was like, the jeans, the jacket, the winter coat, the Scully, the belt, the bag, the sweater. Eight items and through eight items. So it's like an album. So it's like, jesus is ten songs, but there's a lot in there. But then sometimes there's a double album.

[01:23:38.860] - Speaker 1
Do you have any sense of it? Happens on an annual basis or. It's not like that. It's just when you feel it.

[01:23:45.210] - Speaker 2
So I think because my career started when I was a full blown adult, but I've been thinking about these things since I was a teenager, I'm just rolling out the ideas.

[01:24:01.440] - Speaker 1
Because you have a backlog from them.

[01:24:03.840] - Speaker 2
Yeah. And probably when that backlog is out, maybe that's when I'll stop doing it. Or there's so many stories. There's so many.

[01:24:11.920] - Speaker 1
They're going to keep coming, too.

[01:24:13.090] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[01:24:13.720] - Speaker 1
You're as curious now as you ever was.

[01:24:15.700] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[01:24:16.230] - Speaker 1
Why would it stop?

[01:24:17.360] - Speaker 2
Yeah, but kind of do a fall, winter, spring, summer thing, but I don't wholesale.

[01:24:25.970] - Speaker 1
So you do four collections a year.

[01:24:28.020] - Speaker 2
Tim chairs is only four years old, and then I got sick a year ago, so that put a monkey wrench in it. So it's kind of taken me out of it for, like, almost a year, but life willing, between three and four collections a year, internal denim, tears collections, and then the collaborations around it.

[01:24:52.240] - Speaker 1
How do you manufacture and how do you sell if you don't wholesale?

[01:24:55.960] - Speaker 2
I manufacture all around the world. So I make stuff in Japan, make stuff in America, make stuff in China.

[01:25:03.000] - Speaker 1
And those are relationships you've developed over time.

[01:25:05.720] - Speaker 2
You're only as good as your team. And I'm nothing without my team. There's nothing I've ever done on my own. I have an amazing production director, guy named Daniel. We've been working together for about maybe two and a half, three years.

[01:25:22.570] - Speaker 1
What was his background?

[01:25:23.850] - Speaker 2
He owned a brand called Simon Miller. He went to art school for graphic design, got into fashion, owned a brand. Simon Miller left it, sold his shares. He's the cousin of the guy that gave James Corrigan, who gave me the Miles Davis book.

[01:25:41.230] - Speaker 1
Wow.

[01:25:41.920] - Speaker 2
James hits me up. He, you know, my cousin Daniels are really amazing at making clothing. You know me, Trey, I wouldn't recommend anyone unless they were of a certain ilk. And so with someone like James recommending Daniel, I was like, we got to meet this guy and then met him. And he's really helped the brand a lot because he's amazing at, he's an artisan at making clothing, so he helps take my designs and ideas and references, and he helps me bring them to life. And I wouldn't dim tears would be different without, like, Eric films. Almost all the stuff we do, stills and video. Got about eight people I work with at this point.

[01:26:34.160] - Speaker 1
And how do you sell it?

[01:26:35.630] - Speaker 2
Online and at Dover street market.

[01:26:37.920] - Speaker 1
And online would be your website?

[01:26:39.780] - Speaker 2
Yeah. Denimteers.com yeah, everything is limited.

[01:26:43.640] - Speaker 1
Run.

[01:26:44.400] - Speaker 2
It's funny, I don't like the word limited. And I posted something today that I said limited quality anyway. But I make what I can make based off what I feel the demand will be and the funds I have to produce. So as time has gone, the brand keeps growing and doing well, I'm able to make more of stuff that I feel that people want to buy a lot of. There's certain stuff that I feel like. I'm like, oh, this mohair string vest. Maybe not 500 people will want this, right? But it's very important to the line, so I'm going to make 150 of those. And then you make an educated decision based off how things do the next time you make an item of that style. If you buy more or less, would.

[01:27:41.590] - Speaker 1
You ever repress something if people like it?

[01:27:44.420] - Speaker 2
Yeah, every design is different, but from what I've learned and read, not just in creation, it's like certain things miss people. And then if you step off it too quick, you don't get to get your idea out. So by repressing something, the idea gets.

[01:28:07.930] - Speaker 1
To get out, and there's nothing wrong with it. It's a thing you made, and if more people want it, it's cool that they can have it. I don't think we're making things with the idea that they're supposed to be impossible to get.

[01:28:21.230] - Speaker 2
It's like, I want my stuff to be like, okay, like killers of the flower moon. I just went to see it. We went to go see it a month ago when it first opened. Incredible film. Anyone can go see. Andy Wallace said, I want to be like, coke. Everyone could get a coke. So anyone can go see killers of the flower moon. And I think that's, to me, that's the highest level access to everyone. That's what I endeavor towards.

[01:28:51.770] - Speaker 1
Makes sense. Again, you're not making it with the idea that I'm going to change it so more people will like it. You're making it the way you want it. And once you're signing off on the thing that you love, if more people want it, that seems like a good thing.

[01:29:08.610] - Speaker 2
Yeah, it is a good thing, in my opinion. But you see it a lot in music where it's like there's a certain sound and you go back to it and you know when to move on from the sound and you know when to keep doing it.

[01:29:23.660] - Speaker 1
What was the first collaboration you did?

[01:29:26.090] - Speaker 2
The first collaboration I did was with Callie de Witt and B. Fowler. They had a brand called somewhere, and it was a somewhere denim tears collab. That was like, 2016 or 17. And then. Yeah, that was my first one. And then my second one was with online ceramics. Third was with Levi's, and it just rolled from there.

[01:29:56.750] - Speaker 1
How different is it doing a collaboration versus doing your own stuff?

[01:30:01.310] - Speaker 2
When it's a collaboration with another creative artist, it's a different dance, but when.

[01:30:08.480] - Speaker 1
It'S a collaboration with a brand, it's more like they become the manufacturer and you get to design it.

[01:30:13.240] - Speaker 2
Yeah. So, like, example, I did the cotton reef art piece, then converted it into AI file, and then Levi's reached out to me. They wanted to do a collaboration with me, some denim. So when I went up to San Francisco, I had this sheet of paper with the AI file printed out, and I had it on my phone computer, and I opened my computer and was like, this is what I want to know. So it's more. So when I do collaboration with the brand, I'm putting different ideas, stories, and or motifs with their products and doing intervention. So, to me, that was interesting. Like, this story I'm telling with this wreath and cotton, and then doing it with a brand denim brand, which obviously uses cotton. That's interesting. And then telling the story through this american brand was interesting. But then also, it was interesting of what Levi's stood for. Shout out to Jonathan and Hector. Hector is a guy who put me forward for Levi's. It was pretty unprecedented for them to work with someone like me. I wasn't really known like that. Hector is the one that convinced them to do their collaboration with Virgil, and then I was the next one after that.

[01:31:38.850] - Speaker 2
But I remember Jonathan telling me how Levi's like, in the 80s, during the AIDS epidemic, they're like, if you work there and you had a problem with working with someone, if one of your coworkers had AIDS, they just fire you. Which was unprecedented, because obviously, if you've seen a movie, Philadelphia, it was the opposite of that. Those days, people were pushing people with AIDS away. People were getting fired from their jobs. They were being demonized. So me, when I learned that history about Levi's, I'm like, we're in the same mind state. And also, they were down to do it. They weren't, like, scared. They weren't like, ooh, this feels controversial. They're like, this is beautiful. Let's do.

[01:32:20.680] - Speaker 1
So have you ever been censored?

[01:32:23.790] - Speaker 2
Yeah, I've been censored and had different situations with different collaborators. Converse. I did a pan african flag converses. And it took a lot to get those out. Originally, a guy named by the name of curtains, he used to work with Converse and told him the idea. He did it, he was down for it. And I worked with this amazing designer, Amy.

[01:32:49.440] - Speaker 1
What would be the pushback on that?

[01:32:51.420] - Speaker 2
They felt that it could be seen as disrespectful to the american flag. Putting the pan african, Marcus Garves's colors on the pan african flag that David Hemmons did, and doing that on sneakers, they said it felt like it could be disrespectful to the military. The shoes almost got canceled.

[01:33:13.950] - Speaker 1
Interesting to me because it seems like there are lots of flags.

[01:33:22.840] - Speaker 2
There's lots of flags, exactly.

[01:33:24.530] - Speaker 1
I wouldn't have guessed that.

[01:33:25.570] - Speaker 2
You know, it's funny thing, too. I said to them, one of my favorite designers is japanese designer takihiro. He used to have a brand called number nine. Now he has a brand called the Soloist. He put out a sneaker whilst I was working on mine. That was american flag, but a black and white one. I was like, what's the difference, guys? So then it got a bit choppy. We pushed back and forth about it, and then George Floyd happened. I spoke out publicly about my feelings, about the support of Congress, of certain movements that were going on during that time. And I was like, I can't really put out this shoe if I don't see more than just donating money, because intention does more than money. And then they were super responsive and emailed me right away and we had a great talk. And then we decided to still put out the shoes. And all the money from the shoes went to black voters matter. We donated the first release of the sneakers, donated all the money. And then we worked with this artist, Hank Willis Thomas, to make infographics to try to get people to vote, not encourage them to vote who they should vote for, but just to get them.

[01:34:45.950] - Speaker 1
To vote, just to participate.

[01:34:47.670] - Speaker 2
Participate in states where African Americans didn't normally vote. So that's what the sneaker became representative of. So in the end, we had discourse and it was great.

[01:35:03.000] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Tell me about the difference between street wear and luxury fashion.

[01:35:12.210] - Speaker 2
For me, there's four terms that exist. Categories of fashion, ready to wear, sportswear, couture and accessories. Street wear. Still waiting for someone to give me a definition of that all these years later. I don't personally ascribe to that title, luxury. There's a great book called Deluxe written by a woman that I don't know if she still writes for New York Times, but it says how luxury lost its know. I think one of the only luxury brands that still exists is Hermes.

[01:35:45.750] - Speaker 1
I love Hermes.

[01:35:46.650] - Speaker 2
Yeah. Same. If you look at the way they go about making the stuff and the intention behind, know that's luxury. Phoebe Philo, she just put out a luxury. Her new brand that she just put out, that's luxury. So the difference between luxury and, let's say, what I do, ready to wear and sportswear. Luxury is artisan based, and it's small quantities. Not because you're trying to make it worth more.

[01:36:19.790] - Speaker 1
You could only make so much. Yeah, because there's only so many artisans to make it.

[01:36:23.840] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[01:36:24.350] - Speaker 1
Fine crafted, handmade.

[01:36:26.810] - Speaker 2
One time I was in Paris with my friend Willow, and we're at this guy Pierre's restaurant, which he's no longer working there anymore. And the food is incredible. And it's like the size of that recording console with tables around it. So twelve people, 60 people could sit. So someone said to Pierre, why don't you franchise this and make more? He says there's not enough ingredients that are the quality that I make my food with to be able to franchise this. I can't get that many tomatoes of the quality to make what you just ate that you think is so special. So if that's what luxury is, it's like, there's only so many of these women or men who are alive that can make this sweater in this way, and there's only so many people that are apprenticing at it that will be able to do it when these people die.

[01:37:21.930] - Speaker 1
Yeah, because a lot of these skills are getting lost now.

[01:37:25.970] - Speaker 2
Exactly. So that's what luxury is to me, is items made by artisans based off access to the best materials. Not just materials. The way it's crafted, the man hours it takes to stitch or sew something. So that's what luxury is to me. Some people could say luxury is desire. So then, if that's the case, whatever has desire of said customer is luxury. But for me, luxury is how the thing is made. So I've made a couple items that are luxury, like a lot of the items in the Dior collection. Like, there's this amazing Milner that I got to work with. My highlight of the collection, working with Dior, was working with Stefan Jones, who's a milner that works a lot with Kim Jones. He's worked with Mark and other people, and it's just a dad kind of cap, but then it has the denim tears. Dior tears logo, but it's all hand done work, and I forgot. I think it took 48 hours or something to make that part of the hat. And it's beautiful. Not just about how long it takes, but it's beautiful hand work. And then that's why it's fun about certain.

[01:38:46.170] - Speaker 2
I like certain artists and designers, they take, like, marc Jacobs has done it. Remember Mark Jacobs collection? He'd always do the cashmere hoodies and be like, cashmere mixed with silk, but they were just zip up hoodies, sweatpants, cut just like old champion sweatpants, but in cashmere and silk. That's luxury. That's the difference to me.

[01:39:13.720] - Speaker 1
Tell me about your experience with supreme. I think the last time I reached out to you was congratulating you.

[01:39:22.530] - Speaker 2
You're like, I like supreme a lot. Yeah. When I got the job, my experience with supreme was learned a lot. Not so much learned a lot working there. But me being in that situation, working at a company that's, like, gotten that.

[01:39:41.530] - Speaker 1
Big, a big corporate company, that came.

[01:39:45.440] - Speaker 2
From the roots of this thing, some would say this thing of ours that people call street wear or sportswear with.

[01:39:55.390] - Speaker 1
That's funny. It's called this thing of ours. I've never heard that.

[01:39:58.910] - Speaker 2
To me, that's what it is, is this thing of ours.

[01:40:00.950] - Speaker 1
I've heard that's how the mafia refers.

[01:40:04.390] - Speaker 2
To La costa nostra. You know what I mean? Yeah, but stuc 40 acres in the mule, denim, tears. Supreme, sir. Fucking awesome. Babylon, so on and so know we're all nego bait, human made. There's a know the company got sold a couple times, and then James fully sold all of it.

[01:40:34.960] - Speaker 1
Oh, is that true?

[01:40:35.930] - Speaker 2
Yeah, to VF.

[01:40:37.010] - Speaker 1
I didn't know.

[01:40:37.550] - Speaker 2
And when you sell a company, usually the person that bought your brand took a loan out, and there's a thing you call interest. So they took a loan out. There's interest on that loan, and it's just a math problem, how much time you have to make the money back on the loan. And then if you're not making back the money that they spent on top of the interest, you're at a loss, and they're poking around, and that changes the intention of making things. So that's one of the main lessons I learned also. Lesson I learned. Not for me. It's not great working at a company where the founder's still there.

[01:41:24.570] - Speaker 1
That's interesting.

[01:41:25.600] - Speaker 2
Yeah. Because James is the creative director of supreme. Then I came in as a crave director. First ever Crave director? Yeah.

[01:41:32.700] - Speaker 1
Did you feel second guessed?

[01:41:34.990] - Speaker 2
Yeah, I was like, crave director in his pocket, in the sense of, I'll pull out Tremaine's what I want. His idea or opinion. But in the end, it's what I want, which it wasn't presented like that. It presented like, hey, I'm trying to ride off into the sunset and you're going to run this show and work with the team because Crave director doesn't do everything. You work with the team. The whole thing is a team sport. So that was difficult, not really being able to make decisions. But then in the media, when numbers come out about how the brand's doing, Tremaine's doing something wrong, where I'm like, james, still making the decision, but so you're kind of taking the bullets. So then you start to feel like a mascot instead of a completely star. And because that's the thing, it's like LeBron. He's trusted to take that last shot or fake. Like, you can take the last shot and pass it. Know, Jordan would do with John Paxton or Pippen. So it's not always about you taking the last shot, but you're making that decision and working with the coach. Whereas this was like, I'm not making the decision or taking the last shot.

[01:42:55.650] - Speaker 1
But you're taking the blame.

[01:42:57.490] - Speaker 2
Taking the blame. So I learned that there, I was just the outsider there, the way I thought. It's funny, I was like, okay, I'm going to continue the legacy of supreme, but also modernize it in a way that I think would be meaningful to the people that supreme wants to be attached to young people. I don't think that was really understood completely, but then some things were. So it didn't work out because then I started just getting put in compromising positions with artists and people I was working with, that we were working with. And then things would change and then opinions would change, and then it got just really kind of convoluted, in my.

[01:43:47.530] - Speaker 1
Opinion, my experience there keep denim tears going, the whole.

[01:43:52.710] - Speaker 2
Yeah, yeah. Kept denim tears. That was part of my know. James always said denim tears is important. He always said he felt it was one of the best brands out there. Even in the last conversation we had, he said that it got really difficult there, too, because there's, like, things me and James discuss or we're trying to do. And then his c suite, which I was a part of, they're trying to mitigate keeping him happy, but also keeping vf happy. And not. None of it's out in the open. Nothing's clear. So now just causes conflict. It's like it's a family. Right? That's why all the times I've talked about, I've compared it to know, it's like you got Logan Roy and then you have people fighting for who's going to get the keys to the throne, which isn't my thing.

[01:44:48.540] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I think anytime something gets it, it changes just the nature of things getting big. It's impressive that Marc Jacobs was able to get as big as he did. Staying cool.

[01:45:03.810] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[01:45:04.280] - Speaker 1
I think that's more the exception than the rule.

[01:45:08.110] - Speaker 2
Yeah, definitely. And then also, I think, for me, my ideas, I give you an example. So the first thing I did for supreme was like, andre 3000. We shot Andre. That's part thing, too, of being creative director. It's like you're influenced with people, not influence. But I have a relationship with Andre that's just based off friendship, and we have worked together, so I don't know if the answer would have been yes if I wasn't involved.

[01:45:38.580] - Speaker 1
Of course you have relationships.

[01:45:40.580] - Speaker 2
Yeah. So then Andre's down to do it. And then there's an array of images that we've shot, and the images that I felt were the best were him with the flute, because the reason I felt they're the best because they were where he's at right now. And the images we went with were not that much different. It was same, such, not different poses, but no flute. And the discourse from James was, well, would you rather hear him rap or play the flute? If you're going to show. And my response to them was, I'd rather hear him play the flute because that's where he's at. Right, do.

[01:46:22.730] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Has James ever heard him play the flute?

[01:46:25.570] - Speaker 2
No.

[01:46:26.000] - Speaker 1
So then how do you know?

[01:46:27.320] - Speaker 2
Exactly? Yeah, so it's interesting because for a brand that's so, like, we're cool, we're cool and we're genuine, we're real. For me, it was a bit of a cosplay thing, because it's like, we want to present something that feels like Andre is a rapper, but me, I'm like, let's present him in his realest form, which is he walks around with that flute all day, every day. It's an appendage. So end of the day, James the boss, we did the image without the flute. People loved it. Cool. But I'm just using that as an example of that's how everything kind of went, which in situations where the stuff was more charged or there's more discourse about images or stories, we should be telling ideas. It's the same kind of thing where it's like, I'm presenting it. If you want to do it, do it, don't do it. But then it still kind of all falls on me, but I actually don't have any control. And then that just puts me in a compromising place with the artists that we're working with, and just most importantly, compromising placement within myself, where I'm just like, well, why am I even here?

[01:47:40.840] - Speaker 2
And so it just got really political there with project with Arthur Jaffa, which was kind of the boiling point for me resigning from there. I had pitched in February or March 2022 to do a project with Arthur Jafa. Everyone was excited about it. AJ is an amazing artist, but it's not even about him being this big blue chip artist. Any artist that's allowing us to work with them, in my opinion, it should be their discretion which works they want to do. So AJ made his discretion of the imagery he wanted to use. James was into it and said, yeah, this stuff's really important. The imagery was visceral, some of it. One image was of a freed slave. His back had the wounds from when he was a slave being whipped. And another image was a diptech, which was two images together, which is basically, you could call it the Guernica for African Americans. That's right. And the Guernica is the Picasso painting, which is of a war image, of killing, of war. This image is an image of two black men who have been hung for. They were accused of rape, I think, down in Memphis, but they were never tried, and they were hung.

[01:49:03.990] - Speaker 2
And there's a bunch of people, white people, that hung them, standing around them, looking at the camera, taking a picture. And then the next picture is Grape street crips with guns. So the name of that piece is called, I don't care about your past. I just want our love to last. AJ's intention in that picture is to show this. Got you this. It's connected. There's that documentary, the bastards of the party, saying that the bloods and crips are the bastard sons of the african american political parties that fell apart post civil rights movement during the crack epidemic. So there's that piece. There's another image larage. And so anyway, those images got approved, the clothing got made. I get sick. That stuff's supposed to come out. Was supposed to come out. Spring 23, I got sick in fall 22, I'm in hospital for three months. I get out the hospital, I'm on medical leave in total eight months. When I come back, the project is in stasis, and I'm like, oh, what's going? And before I can even ask, an email sent by an employee, we had two employees raise concerns about the imagery, which they have the right to.

[01:50:39.100] - Speaker 2
So they raised concerns about the imagery. The first employee, we had a discussion, me, her, and the other C suite team. And I explained to her AJ's intention and supreme's intention. I'm a conduit for both of those intentions as the creative director in the artwork. And she's like, oh, is this stuff going to be explained, the artwork? I said, yeah. And then she said, I'm cool with it. And then the next employee saw April 1, which was coincidentally the day I returned back to work from Medical leave. Eight months of medical leave from having the lower aortic aneurysm. The employee sent an email to the C suite saying he felt wise. Supreme thinks it's okay to profit off this terrible. He's a black dude. So then he sent me an email saying, hey, tremend, I'd like to talk. So I thought he was going to talk to me about the AJ piece. And we talk, and he says, hey, you want to talk about the AJ piece? So I'm ready to give him again, repeat AJ's attention with the work and Supreme's attention. And then he says, oh, no, I talked to James about it already.

[01:51:54.800] - Speaker 2
I want to talk to you about. It's tough for me, working here as a black person, where you seem to be flourishing here. How do you flourish here? When it bothers me that the clothing and the stuff we make is largely based off black culture, but there's not a lot of black people in the design team, right? And I told them, I haven't worked anywhere where there was a large amount of black people around, working in these type of institutions. Only place I ever worked where there was a lot of black people was at Grady's liquor store. So it's something that I'm used to, and it's something that within reason and within my power, not just for black people, for all people. I try to diversify workplaces that I'm in based off people with talent that can do the job. And I also try to make it diverse, far as women. But it's all the same to me. Having women involved, having working class people involved of any color, having people of any gender, it's all the same to me.

[01:53:02.650] - Speaker 1
Yeah, just people who are good. People who are good at their job and going to make the team a better team.

[01:53:07.180] - Speaker 2
Yeah, I want to make it diverse with talented people. And I said, I'm doing what I can. I've had discussions with HR since I've came here. They told me they're trying to make things. I haven't seen it happen yet. Let me know what I can do to help you. He's like, well, just this conversation has helped me. And we had a great conversation. And then a couple of weeks before I resigned. He resigned. He resigned for feeling disgruntled about filling his upward trajectory supreme and filling. There are some racial insativities there. Those are his opinions. I've had conversations with HR about that. They said they were addressing the stuff. But he decided to resign. And also he had his other reasons. So from April 1 to August, it's four months. No one talked to me about the AJ project, so I was building my strength back up.

[01:54:06.960] - Speaker 1
It was a surprise. What happened to you? Tell me what happened physically at a.

[01:54:10.460] - Speaker 2
Lower aortic aneurysm, which was.

[01:54:13.540] - Speaker 1
Did you know it was something?

[01:54:15.650] - Speaker 2
No. It was hereditary, but I didn't know it ran in my family.

[01:54:18.740] - Speaker 1
I see.

[01:54:19.170] - Speaker 2
I found out after the fact that I had an uncle that died from one in his 20s. So my main focus was my recovery.

[01:54:27.910] - Speaker 1
How did it reveal itself? Like, what was the event?

[01:54:31.380] - Speaker 2
The event was. Started to feel a sharp pain in my chest first. Then I felt a sharp pain. Actually, the chain pain I felt in my chest was actually my aorta. So I was filling it from my chest, felt short of breath, thought I was having a heart attack. And then I felt this excruciating pain in my back.

[01:54:51.150] - Speaker 1
Upper back. Yeah, between the shoulders?

[01:54:54.510] - Speaker 2
Yeah, between the shoulders, which was my aorta dissecting. It was splitting. And then that pain kind of subsided. And then my leg went numb because the lower part of my aorta, that dissection ended there and it ripped apart. And that's usually when people die from it within like three or four minutes. That's why it's called. The nickname for. It's called the widowmaker. John Ritter from three's company. He died from it, but some reason it ripped, but a little piece of it held on. So I was bleeding internally, but not full out bleeding. So my leg went numb. And that's when my wife, my girlfriend at the time, called the ambulance, went to get the ambulance and saved my life. If I wouldn't have been with her, I definitely would have died. And then we got to the hospital. It took them a long time to diagnose at the first hospital. And then about 8 hours later, amazing doctor. She came on and she immediately started asking me certain questions and got me to get a scan. And then she realized I was suffering an aneurysm. And she called up to Cornell, which is one of some of the best doctors for that type of cardiac things.

[01:56:19.820] - Speaker 2
I went and had emergency surgery that was supposed to be 3 hours. Ended up being 8 hours. Spent a month in the ICU. Wow. Yeah. I mean, I almost died three times from the initial thing and then had got pneumonia. Then I got septis, blood infection, and then also I was on dialysis for about three months. So I did a month in the ICU and then they moved me up to Baker unit. I did rehab for two months and then came home in December 20 eigth and recovered at home doing pt three times a week with my amazing physical trainer, Jacqueline Paler, doing my doctor checkups. And I've had an amazing but yeah, miracle recovery. I mean, my doctor said it was a 5% chance of me living. Wow. But I got very lucky and then have a very important person to live for, which is Andy. So she was there with me, sleeping on a lazy boy every night for three months, which I think that helped me, really gave me the strength. Know, when you're recovering, there's medicine and then there's willpower. Wanting to be here, pushing with that. I don't know if it's your molecules, your soul, what the energy is, but it takes the mix of all those, you know.

[01:57:52.180] - Speaker 2
I had a lot of love, mainly Andy and my dad and Anthony and a side and Chris, other people, you know, I got this friend, Cactus. She'd be flying in to visit me from know, coming to visit me in the hospital, my brother, other friends coming to visit me. And all that love mixed with the amazing work from the doctors helped me get me back. But definitely the main protagonist is Andy. Definitely she'd get out of work and she'd come straight, straight to the hospital and hang out with me and then stay tonight, go to work, come back every day for three months. I don't know how I would have done it without that support.

[01:58:37.750] - Speaker 1
I mean, I'm so happy you're here.

[01:58:39.510] - Speaker 2
Me too. Yeah, me too.

[01:58:42.010] - Speaker 1
So happy you're here. How has that experience changed you?

[01:58:48.330] - Speaker 2
The only way it's changed me is when I met Andy. From the day I met Andy. She's special. And then she became an amazing colleague and then became an amazing friend. And then we fell in love right before I got sick. Like a month or two before I got sick, a month before I got sick. And once I got better, I just didn't waste any time. Where before I should have just asked her to marry me. I knew. And when I first literally the first month dating, I should have just asked her, but you tell yourself, oh, well, let me wait and see. And not saying that's wrong either, but that's what I was thinking when I was waiting for the ambulance in the hallway in my apartment. I was like, if I got to survive, I'm going to marry Andy. That was my thought. My last thought was my little brother, McCoy. My dad had a kid. He had my brother three years ago with his amazing wife, Shelly. And what I thought before I went to surgery was, I need more time with Andy and McCoy. So when I got survived, that's what's changed.

[02:00:08.760] - Speaker 2
It's just me trying to spend as much time, within reason with Andy and people I love. But I did that before that because that's what, again, this whole talk. My dad and my mom always like, hey, we're not paralyzed tomorrow. We got to have fun. People might consider it morbid. My dad talked about death a lot because both my mom and my dad. My mom talked about death a lot because she lost two of her brothers when she was a kid, one to the aneurysm and one came back sick from Vietnam. So at a young age, she had a lot of loss of two people she loved very much. She would speak about that. She would say, tremaine, I'm not going to be here forever. Take care of you. You got to figure it out. You got to figure it out. And she's like, you got to look out for your little brother when I'm not here. And then my dad, his sense of mortality came from, he was a tv news cameraman, so he's like, basically a coroner. He saw death every day. So, yeah, he gets to do cool things like cover a Yankees game or the Super bowl or go to the White House.

[02:01:15.000] - Speaker 2
But mainly they sell him death, they sell him that fact. So he'd cover all kinds of stuff, and that just made him say, hey, man, this guy died from a crane falling on him. This person got murdered. And he'd tell the stories, but the end of the story was always like, that's why we got to be nice to each other and have as much fun as possible, because we are not guaranteed a second. So it didn't make me more like, oh, I appreciate my life more, and I'm going to go for it more. Actually made me like, you know what? This work stuff's cool, but that's why me, Andy, we went on a month honeymoon. He's like, I survived. You were there with me. We got married. We're going away for a month.

[02:02:05.330] - Speaker 1
Great.

[02:02:05.970] - Speaker 2
You know what I mean?

[02:02:06.880] - Speaker 1
Great.

[02:02:07.360] - Speaker 2
We're going away for a month. That's what I learned from. It's just spend as much time with Andy and McCoy and other people that I love, but I already knew that. And also just maybe just this work shit is not as important. It's just not. Art's important. And it's important for me to be fulfilled because I won't be the best husband or father. We don't have a kid yet, but I won't be able to be the best husband or father if I'm not fulfilled. Same for Andy, same for McCoy, same for know. So that is important, but not at the expense of, in my opinion, what I've time with people you love. You know what? We talked about fear a lot. It put not the fear of death in me. It put the fear of not spending what I feel is an adequate amount of time with people I respect, I care about, and love.

[02:03:07.770] - Speaker 1
Understood.

[02:03:08.810] - Speaker 2
Because before I never feared death. Why would I? I'm like, it's going to happen, and where my parents raised me. But I still don't fear death by fear not having enough time with Andy, because she's like one of the most amazing people I ever met. So I have that fear. And the way I meet that fear is by letting her know how much I value her, what she's done for me, and even letting her know what she means to me and then spending time and having fun.

[02:03:37.860] - Speaker 1
Just great.

[02:03:38.960] - Speaker 2
Yeah. So that's what I learned. Same thing with McCoy, same thing with aside, same thing with Frazier and David. Chris, the know, even like, with know, it's like we're man. Like I could see someone that I'm really cool with, a friend, and it's like, you know what? I was like, I'm a hit, Rick, when I'm in LA, and if we can meet up, we could meet up. So, might not see you for a year again. Maybe we'll never see each other again, but we made time to see each other on this one, like we've done in the past. So that's what I try to do. You can't see everyone all the time, but within reason, I rotate it, and then I have. My main concern is Andy. That's my number one thing.

[02:04:19.250] - Speaker 1
Do you think of yourself as a spiritual person?

[02:04:22.430] - Speaker 2
I don't, but then even what I'm about to say, my kiss could say, could be considered spiritual. I think life is meaningless, and we put the meaning, you put the meaning into it, and then you're like, loved ones that you think you want to give some meaning to life. So maybe that is spiritual. I'm not well read in all the religions, but I know stuff from some. From the Bible, from Buddhism. Joseph Campbell, Miyamoto Musashi, five rings, the book of five rings. Tao ji Kundo can go on and on comic books. That's what I was. Those are biblical to me, comic books. That's stuff I've learned. You learn from comic books. Like the X Men. Professor X was based off Martin Luther King, and Magneto was based off Malcolm X, and it was a trojan horse to tell that story through these mutants. And the mutants represented African Americans in America. You know what I mean? So I've learned more from that than I learned from the Bible, but just only because I've read more comic books than I've read the. You know, I'm agnostic, and when people hear that, I think they think atheists.

[02:05:36.380] - Speaker 2
And it's not. I don't subscribe to any religion. Or that there's an omnipotent being with human.

[02:05:44.760] - Speaker 1
Or that there's not.

[02:05:45.950] - Speaker 2
Or that there's not. Yeah. Or that that omnipotent being has human traits. Because that's the thing about humans. We're like humans as whole. We're narcissists, and we're like, you know, it's like someone sees an alien, it kind of looks human.

[02:05:59.790] - Speaker 1
Look at clouds. We see faces.

[02:06:01.530] - Speaker 2
We see faces because it's like. Whereas, does a dog see a face in the cloud? No, maybe. Probably not. I'll tell you this. I felt spiritual the first time I saw the sun after being in the ICU for a month.

[02:06:15.570] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[02:06:16.400] - Speaker 2
I realized that the sun that I hadn't seen in a month from being in my hospital room. And the sun that I thought I never was going to see again was the same. That sun that shined on every living being, that everything that's lived in the Milky Way, our galaxy, the earth, the dinosaurs, my mom, who's no longer here.

[02:06:37.640] - Speaker 1
Same sun.

[02:06:38.430] - Speaker 2
The same sun. It shined on every living organism that has ever spurned from the earth to the last one. That same sun that I hadn't saw, that I took for granted. I felt that connection when I felt the sun in my wheelchair with my shades on and took my shades off and started crying. Chris was there, and my other friend Chris was. Remember, you know, texting Andy the picture and my dad. So I guess I am spiritual, maybe not by the textbook definition. For me, my religion. I find religion in people that I connect with. I find religion in the relationship. So I found religion in relationship with a side. I found religion in my relationship with my friend Frasier. And I think I found my highest religion in my relationship with Andy.

[02:07:42.410] - Speaker 1
So I guess religion ultimately is about connection.

[02:07:45.030] - Speaker 2
Yeah, that's what it. Yeah, connection. You know what, though? The one thing I'll say which hasn't been said about the whole thing with me and supreme, when I really think about it, and my friend Jimmy illuminated to me was the issue between me and supreme was I don't really get uncomfortable about talking about anything. And the top brass there was uncomfortable to talk to me about that imagery and them wanting to change it out or not use it. And when people get uncomfortable and have fear gets in them, that's when mistakes and miscommunications and feelings and shit goes awry. And I guess they just didn't have it in them to even have the conversation, which is all, again, go back to the converse thing, the discourse. Because even you asked me if I ever have been censored. Yes. There was another shoe I was going to do at converse with my friend, artist Dan Colon, and he has a farm called Skyhouse Farm. And we're exploring stuff with food and design and black food. So we're going to do a converse of watermelon rind. The skin of a watermelon. So converse felt that was controversial.

[02:09:08.090] - Speaker 2
And they felt it could be interpreted as racist, right, because of menstrual imagery in the past of blacks and watermelons. But the thing is, I never were.

[02:09:20.430] - Speaker 1
These white people who were concerned about it being racist.

[02:09:23.370] - Speaker 2
Both, okay, black and white people, okay. But the difference in the situation was they called me, they told me they weren't down, they didn't want to do it. They were uncomfortable with the imagery and they didn't want to do it. But they weren't uncomfortable with having the conversation.

[02:09:39.530] - Speaker 1
Right. They were straight, straight up.

[02:09:41.430] - Speaker 2
And we had the conversation. They said, we're not going to put these out. And I was like, you guys are kind of wasting my time. And I think you guys are aiding and embedding what you think you're protecting. But cool. And that's why I never posted anything like converse has done something wrong.

[02:10:03.080] - Speaker 1
Do you ever get the feeling when something like that happens? Do you ever feel like, I'm going to find another way to get these shoes out?

[02:10:09.020] - Speaker 2
My whole thing was, it was like that silhouette of the chuck. And then working with Dan and sky high farm and telling that I have art and things I've made with that imagery of the watermelon, it's going to come out in different places.

[02:10:22.070] - Speaker 1
Okay.

[02:10:22.500] - Speaker 2
Yeah, so it will come out. But again, did they censor me? I guess, but they talked to me and we were able to have discourse. We disagreed, but it was fine in the end because I respected that they have a right to make a choice as a company to not want to put it out. And they respected me by hearing me out why I feel we should. And we talked about it and moved on. And I guess because we had that situation with the pan african shoes and it went well, I was happy with the outcome of that. And donating the money to black voters matters. So that's the thing. Whereas I'm about not about giving my way, I'm about discourse. And then wherever the chips fall, I'm okay with that as long as the talk happens.

[02:11:10.610] - Speaker 1
Tell me from where you sit, describe the fashion industry and paint a picture of what the fashion industry is and how does it work.

[02:11:20.870] - Speaker 2
The fashion industry currently is no different than the film industry in a sense of paramount or Karen group. They're a bank and they invest in directors, creative directors. So whether matthew blase or I think apple did killers of the flower moon, apple invested in Martin Scorsese. And they want you to give the world clothing, tell a story so it could sell and they can make more money than they did last year. That's the fashion industry. That's where it is now. That's not how it started.

[02:12:01.380] - Speaker 1
Where do you think it started and when do you think it changed?

[02:12:06.550] - Speaker 2
Fashion really started with the creation of the bourgeoisie, right? When people had a superfluous amount of money.

[02:12:22.510] - Speaker 1
Before that, people just wore work clothes or base standard uniform. Everybody dressed the same.

[02:12:27.740] - Speaker 2
Yeah, actually, I would say fashion started in tribal times. Really? When I really think about stuff I've read tribal times to signify different things and to signify hierarchies, or this down the third. Within tribes, you'd see it across different indigenous things. But then once agriculture happened and humans were able to make a superfluous amount of food, they were able to do other things, become musicians, make clothing, because.

[02:13:00.860] - Speaker 1
Before that, everybody had to hunt together.

[02:13:03.530] - Speaker 2
All your time was spent was finding food. So you didn't have time to make a flannel shirt. You had time to be like, okay, I got something to wear for my feet so I could chase down this animal. Everything was purposeful. So then once agricultural revolution happened, an agricultural revolution happened because people wanted to be stationary, to go to church, so to do to be stationary and not to be moving. All the time as hunter gatherers, you had to make a superfluous amount of food. So once that happened, made the superfluous amount of food. People were able to become scientists, soldiers, and once the barter system stopped, and money, then it was like, that's when the bourgeoisie of any type of civilization was created, whether it was the Egyptians, the French, whatever. And they started having clothes to represent who they were.

[02:14:03.040] - Speaker 1
It was like the haves and the have nots. And the haves wore fashionable clothing to separate themselves from the masses.

[02:14:11.430] - Speaker 2
Yes. But then the have nots, the proletariat, they wore clothing to get a job done. Denim. Denim was created because the other cotton fabrics that were worn would get torn, and then they would have to bring in loads of pants to change into as their terrace got torn. So that was more work, bringing in these extra pants. Once denim was created, you didn't have to bring all these denim with you because your denim would last you for a couple of months or something. That was function. But then eventually denim became fashion.

[02:14:48.110] - Speaker 1
Feel like that might have been as recently as the 70s, when denim became fashion.

[02:14:52.130] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[02:14:52.410] - Speaker 1
Because even like Maria Vanderbilt.

[02:14:54.710] - Speaker 2
Yeah. Clothing was originally. Not originally, but there was like couture. So you had, let's say, christian Dior, he was designing couture dresses and stuff, right? And only a certain amount of people could afford it, but not just the money. It goes back to the artisan thing. There's only a certain amount that could made. Then the advent of ready to wear happened, where it was clothing that was still made well, but not couture. So it could be made in higher quantities and it could cost less, so more people. It was still a bourgeoisie thing, but more people could buy it. Then ready to wear went to the level where then the industrial revolution, they're able to make clothing cheaply at higher numbers. So then these fashions that, let's say a mom or a dad saw someone wearing, you could go buy it in the Walmart, a version of it, and then it all trickled down to where we're at now, where you see something on TikTok and you can click on it and takes you to a link and you can buy something. But it's a long history. But like you said, kind of short. You know, it's short because businessmen are like, hey, people want to be like Elvis, what if we make shoes that look like, you know, I remember the last page of the book, please kill me.

[02:16:20.230] - Speaker 2
The book goes through the whole oral history of the punk sing, and the book ends in Hawaii. To this guy who had died childhood, and his first show he went to was he saw Elvis and he said all he remembered from the show was his shoes. That's where fashion really started, when the proliferation of celebrity culture and then people wanting to buy beetle boots, buy shirts like James Brown. My grandfather got so mad at my dad because my dad's first check, $99 that he got from my grandfather for making bricks, he went and bought Augusta, Georgia, bought some pants and a silk shirt and some stack heels to look like James Brown and spend all his money.

[02:17:04.450] - Speaker 1
That's really at the place where James Brown got him, probably.

[02:17:08.630] - Speaker 2
Yeah, in Augusta, yeah. And that's where I think when celebrity culture hit with the music, that's where I think fashion really took off, was with musicians, because actors, cool. You see the actor wearing it, but back then, you didn't really see actors.

[02:17:28.490] - Speaker 1
Only in the movies.

[02:17:29.510] - Speaker 2
Only in the movies. But musicians. You see the musicians and they're on stage and you see David boy or Mick Jagger or whoever, and you're like, oh, shit, I want to wear that. And then brands start making stuff not just based off that. A lot of it was ushered in by Carl Lagerfeld and Laurent. You know, there's this book called the beautiful Fall. I haven't read all of it, but I started reading it, and it's about how the explosion of, like you said, fashion in Paris in the competition between Eve St. Laurent and Carl Lagerfeld. And Eve took over. Dior worked there for like three seasons or three years. He got fired, then eventually started his own label. Carl was working at a bunch of different places and then eventually got to Chanel, and then it just exploded from, know, just like shit exploded from fucking Chuck Berry and Elvis and a couple people. And then rock and roll exploded. Same thing with fashion. To the point now where you have companies that did them. Tears. There's so many bootlegs out there. Can you always tell what's a bootleg? Yeah. Can most people tell if they want to?

[02:18:51.540] - Speaker 1
Tell me about it. Tell me about the bootleg market.

[02:18:54.230] - Speaker 2
The bootleg market has existed for a long time, and it's basically if you're popping, you're getting bootlegged. It's funny, I remember a talk between Virgil had all these activations happening in London. Him and Kim were doing a talk and asked the question, I know you guys both, but Kim, how did you know that Virgil had made it? He says, when I went to China, saw all the know. So bootleg is really kind of like, lets you know you have pierced culture. If your stuff being bootlegged, if you're not being bootleg, it's not hot. It's not hot. It's not hot. Some people don't know, but people do know. And it's just like, they bootleg and they're selling for like $40 99% of the time. The bootleg is way lower quality than.

[02:19:45.350] - Speaker 1
The original, and there's no r and d that goes into it. It's just a straight up copy.

[02:19:50.650] - Speaker 2
Exactly. So I got to pay Daniel, I got to pay my whole team, my time.

[02:19:57.080] - Speaker 1
Got to have the ideas.

[02:19:58.230] - Speaker 2
Got to have the ideas. You got to make it. You got to make samples where the bootlegger just buys your piece, copies it, copies it and makes it. So that's part of why they could sell it a lot cheaper. And then usually the quality is horrible. That's another reason why they could sell it cheaper. But it's interesting, like, this era of bootlegging, it's new because now people are bootlegging your stuff and creating their own versions, designs, and then they feel the bootlegger feels, well, they take your ip and they're like, it's my ip now. So there's the thought of, like, everything's kind of like open source. There's no ip anymore.

[02:20:39.500] - Speaker 1
That's interesting.

[02:20:40.380] - Speaker 2
And I'm like, interesting.

[02:20:42.360] - Speaker 1
No, it's just interesting to think about. I had a conversation with James Purse, and he started as a grateful dead bootlegger.

[02:20:48.190] - Speaker 2
Wow. Sick. Wow. That's amazing.

[02:20:51.480] - Speaker 1
And now he's done collaboration with.

[02:20:56.730] - Speaker 2
That's incredible. Yeah, no, yeah. That's the funny thing about the bootleg. It's not like bootlegging liquor back in prohibition days, where it's like they're bootlegging that because it's illegal. And also the bootleggers are like, they're filling in the gaps of, okay, I can make a certain amount of jeans. I have a certain amount of money that I pay to get it made. And then once they sell out, they sell out. It might take me three months, actually, it does. For me to invest and remake the stuff, if I rerelease it, it takes months. Like, my sweatsuits, they're puff print and they're paneled. It's not like I could take a blank and put the print on it. It's paneled so that it's seamless and the print looks good and it's not shitty. That takes three months, two, three months for me to do it. So people want this stuff. The bootlegger is doing a much not as good version, but they're getting it out to the people, so maybe the person just doesn't want to wait. Plus, it's cheaper. They don't care. So that's kind of the bootlegging. But it's interesting now. Like, people bootlegging and doing it and putting their spin on it, it's interesting.

[02:22:15.290] - Speaker 2
It's funny, and it's almost like the bootleggers will be mad at you, like you're copying us. It's like, I created this, but cool, man. My thing with the bootleggers is like, have fun, but I'm going to keep putting my stuff out. Of course, in the end, the choice is up to the customer.

[02:22:38.340] - Speaker 1
How do you handle fulfillment of sales?

[02:22:42.670] - Speaker 2
Okay, these flannels, there's these flannels that I have made in Japan. They get made. We ship them over on a boat, hopefully because it's cheaper to ship them on a boat and more environmentally sound to ship them on a boat than fly them. They get to the port, clear through customs. They don't come to my studio. They go straight to the fulfillment. Fulfillment center, and then they get packaged there. And then when someone buys it on demteers.com, it gets fulfilled from there. And my one wholesale account, Dover street market, it gets fulfilled from there, too. So that's how that works. Yeah.

[02:23:22.700] - Speaker 1
Tell me something you believe now that you didn't believe when you were younger.

[02:23:30.750] - Speaker 2
I didn't believe that I'd be like, living so much of my adult life without my mom. I was ignorant and I didn't listen to her and my dad about mortality. I thought I was going to have her as long as I had my nana or my grandma, who I just said her birthday was 97. My mom died at 58. So when I was younger, I was a mom's, still am a mom's boy, and I just thought I was going to have my mom a lot longer than I did. But we had great times. So grateful for all the time we did have, but I thought I was going to have her longer than I did. To lose at 33 was pretty. Like, I was like, man. But then you know what I think your compassion comes from when you realize there's someone that never knew their mom, and then that's how you circumvent grief. Not that I don't miss my mom, but then I just.

[02:24:29.170] - Speaker 1
Could have been worse.

[02:24:30.250] - Speaker 2
Could have been worse. Could have been worse. And like, the union of my mom and dad and our little family, I assume my mom died. It got shattered, not shattered like, we don't talk to each other, but we kind of all went off on our own paths. My little brother, my dad. My dad got rebarried. I went just kind of like tunnel vision with work. So did my little brother. So I just thought I'd be go visiting my parents down south where they retired to. Yeah. Which is kind of the same thing. So that's the thing that's different in my adult life, that I thought it would be that way when I was a kid.

[02:25:25.230] - Speaker 1
Forever. Um.
