Speaker 1 (00:05)
Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. I always like to tell people, you are not running or walking around in walking or running shoes. You're actually running or walking around in horse riding boots. And so this goes back to the Middle Ages, but it sinks with pop culture today. You'll think about it instantly as soon as I say it. So the Middle Ages, we had royalty and military that rode horses, right? So they're like the heroes, right? They are the pop culture icons of the time. And these guys are riding horses. And they came up with shoes specifically for stirrups. So stirrups had been invented. And you want to stay in the stirrups so you have these shoes that hold you in the stirrups. And so what they did is they made shoes pointy because human feet...

Speaker 2 (01:06)
Human feet are not pointy.

Speaker 1 (01:08)
Human feet are not pointy. They're widest at the end of the toe, not widest at the ball. And then they have that heel. You think of a typical Dress shoe, and that is there to hold you in that stirrup.

Speaker 2 (01:17)
So almost all shoes have some version of a heel.

Speaker 1 (01:22)
99%.

Speaker 2 (01:22)
The whole reason for the heel originally was to keep your foot in the stirrup. Precisely. That's amazing. I never knew that.

Speaker 1 (01:30)
So, yeah, I love showing a picture of a horse riding boot in a stirrup and just explaining to people, What you're wearing came from this, and it's all about pop culture. People on the streets at the time in the Middle Ages saw their heroes in these boots, and then they started making boots for themselves or shoes for themselves that mimicked what they saw their heroes wearing, just like we do today. We see people on the big screen or on the music stage wearing whatever, and people want to wear what their pop culture icons wear, basically.

Speaker 2 (02:04)
Or their sports start.

Speaker 1 (02:05)
Or sports, yeah. It doesn't matter. Any aspect of pop culture, basically. And so then that proliferated. And the next thing you know, it's a couple of centuries later, and people are walking around in horse riding shoes, almost in mass.

Speaker 2 (02:18)
And what are the negative effects on foot health?

Speaker 1 (02:22)
It hasn't been until fairly recently that people wore shoes all the time because this was so uncomfortable previously. Frankly, it still is. People just don't know it. It's not as bad as it was, but the negative effects are unbelievable. I actually go and speak to podiatrists and other sports doctors, and we get into this. If you look at the research, we go to the billion people on the planet that don't wear modern shoes. They're in primitive sandals or barefoot most of the time. Basically, zero chronic foot conditions. It's a really stark contrast to America. According to APMA data, the American Podiatric Medical Association, 73% of American adults report foot pain on a regular basis, on a yearly basis. Almost three out of four of us are reporting our feet hurting. That is probably the I don't know if this all's base answer to your question. But essentially, one thing we see that is ever present is plantar fasciosis, what we used to call plantar fasciitis, bunions, neuromas, metatarxalgia. Any of those chronic foot conditions that are so common in the in the world today are essentially nonexistent in these populations of people that don't wear modern footwear.

Speaker 2 (03:36)
We're presented as the footwear is there to protect our feet when in reality, it's doing the exact opposite.

Speaker 1 (03:43)
Yeah, I think you hit on something key there is a great piece of footwear should protect our feet and nothing more. The problem that most people don't realize is that 99% of all footwear out there deforms your feet. You get out of bed every morning, barefoot, your toes spread, your heel on the ground. You were born this way, you come this way. This is OEM human, right? Then you put a shoe on, and 99% of all shoes deform your foot out of its natural position. They raise the heel, They crowd the toes together, they push up in the arch because when the big toe gets bent in just a quarter inch and the heel gets raised even just a half inch, that essentially renders your arch much weaker and less stable. Then your foot starts to collapse and you need this thing called of arch support, which is new to humanity. We go back a couple of hundred years ago and arch support didn't exist, and we were fine without it. Now, you would ask almost anybody, Oh, I need arch support. And it's like, Well, can you go walk on the beach barefoot without arch support?

Speaker 1 (04:47)
Oh, yeah, I do that. Can you go garden in your backyard barefoot? Oh, yeah, I can do that. How about walk in the grass? Oh, yeah, that's fine. So when do you need arch support? Oh, well, when I have my shoes on, I have to have arch support. Frankly, they're absolutely right because they put their foot in a shoe that then takes their foot out of its ability to stabilize itself. You have to have an arch when you have a raised heel in a tapered toe box. You don't have to if your feet are super strong, but it's definitely helpful.

Speaker 2 (05:14)
Modern shoes weaken and deform the foot.

Speaker 1 (05:17)
Deform, destabilize, and weaken. Absolutely.

Speaker 2 (05:22)
Then from the foot, having those issues, what are the upstream issues in the rest of the body if that happens to your feet?

Speaker 1 (05:32)
Yeah, massive. As a running coach and biomechanics guy, this is where it gets really interesting. Statistically speaking, the number one way to prevent running injuries is not what anybody would think. It's actually to go through a foot strengthening protocol. People might think to themselves, Well, how is that going to prevent running injuries? The reality is your feet are your landing gear. When your feet land right and can stabilize and control at the ground level, that then takes pressure off of everything else. If that's not happening right, when your foot hits the ground and it's not able to have the right amount of strength, it's not able to control, it's not able to stabilize, then all those forces, and we're talking joint impacts, shear forces, joint torques, all this stuff is then translated further up to the kinetic chain until it hits a weak link, basically. For everyone, it's different, but for most people, that's going to be shins, it's going to be knees, it's going to be hips, or it's going to be lower back. And so what the foot can't control at ground level then gets passed on up the chain. And it's interesting as we, again, look at these billion people on the planet that don't wear shoes, they have a far lower incidence of joint issues as well.

Speaker 1 (06:45)
And people say, Oh, yeah, but these people aren't overweight. And it's like, well, there's a lot of them who are. We look at people in Polynesian islands who are, I don't know how to call them overweight, but they're giant humans. This is actually how I got on this, by the way.

Speaker 2 (06:57)
Tell me, tell me about it. Part of it. How did you get on it?

Speaker 1 (07:00)
So my journey, we opened a shoe store when I was nine. And by the time I'm 18 heading off to college, I realized that most everybody comes in to buy shoes because something hurts.

Speaker 2 (07:10)
Were your parents runners as well?

Speaker 1 (07:12)
Yeah. So my mom's a five Olympic trials qualifier and one-time world record holder in the 8K. And my dad was also an elite marathon runner and held state records for ultra-marathon distances as well.Wow.And both of them came from sedentary, non-active families. In fact, we go to a family reunion and people are always like, who are the skinny people? We just stick out a sore thumb, right? I have a lot of people say, Oh, you're just genetically bred to do this, basically. And my dad was actually a collegiate football player and baseball player, drafted to play pro-baseball with the Angels. So I don't know that there was a lot of distance running peraverse in our background, right? So anyway, I get to heading off to college and I'm like, I want to study How do you study this stuff? Because most of the time it comes in because something hurts. I want to fix that. I want to be better at making that better for them. I want to be able to help them. Frankly, half of them are coming in. They've already been to the doctor or several doctors, and they're like, My doctor hasn't been able to help me.

Speaker 1 (08:14)
They throw their custom orthotics in the garbage can, and they're just like, What do you got? I wanted to be really good at helping these people. Part of my collegiate journey took me to the North shore of O'ahu in Hawaii, and I spent two years there studying with this Finnish biomechanics, exercise scientist named Joke Gókonan. He had actually developed this toe strengthening machine that I had been using at my house since I was a kid because my dad had read studies that one of the biggest difference between the African runners and the American runners was that the African runners had much greater foot and toe strength. I had this weight lifting machine for my toes, and I find out this guy out in Hawaii was one of the creators of it. I end up going out to study with him. But But while I was there, I had grown up my whole life being conditioned by the shoe industry. Running shoe employees don't get any training, really, except from shoe companies. So if you're with me, it's not running, it's propaganda. I would say it's like 3% science, 97% BS. And I was already questioning it, don't get me wrong.

Speaker 1 (09:23)
And I had started wearing the Vibram 5 fingers, which you may be aware of, the barefoot style shoes. They had just hit the market. We were the first running shoe store in the country to carry them and start selling them. This is the place I'm at. I head out to Hawaii, and I'm surrounded by giant humans who have flat feet, which I've been told by every shoe company since I was knee high to a grasshopper is horrible. They pronate like crazy, meaning their feet roll in, which, again, I've been told by every shoe company in the world that this is terrible, and they have a solution for it. Then most of them weigh quite a bit. As I'm observing this when I first get there, I'm like, Wow, I've been sent to help these people. But as I get to know them closer, I come in and I'm like, Hey, so tell me about your feet. They're just like, Bro, about my feet? I'm like, Well, tell me. They hurt, right? I mean, you're a huge guy. Your feet roll in like crazy. They're flat. You got no arches. You got flat feet. Your feet probably hurt.

Speaker 1 (10:26)
This is what I do. I've been doing this since I was a little kid. I'd love to help you. And they would all just look at me like, Bro, my feet don't hurt. And I'm like, Oh, come on. It's okay. I'm here to help you. My feet don't hurt, bro. Just over and over. And I find this across the board. It's just the complete opposite of everything I'd ever been told by every shoe company and every training meeting I'd ever been to. And I had read some of this stuff. I was already into it, and that was just jump off point where it was like, Okay, I got to get serious about this. Because if I really want to help people, I can't do it through this lens of just complete garbage that I have been taught for my entire life up to this point. And so I eventually, after a couple of years in Hawaii, and I ended up running collegially out there for a couple of years, I would run hour and a half on the beach barefoot. I'd never been healthier in my life. I'd go hammer a mountain, come down, run hard, run on the beach, and then go soak in the ocean and go surf, and just let that saltwater do its healing thing.

Speaker 1 (11:27)
And I come back to the shoe store, and all of a sudden it's like, wow, I don't believe in anything we sell. That's a rough place to be. That's how I got into all this.

Speaker 2 (11:39)
And then what was the first? Did you start making samples of foot healthy shoes?

Speaker 1 (11:45)
Yeah, so shortly after I got back, I never found that barefoot style shoes like the Five Fingers were a solution for the average person for long distance running on hard flat manmade surfaces. The argument is like, hey, humans throughout the eons have run around barefoot. But throughout the eons, we didn't have concrete and asphalt. And so my thought was like, well, we want to simulate running barefoot on a natural surface.

Speaker 2 (12:14)
So most natural surfaces are softer than concrete.

Speaker 1 (12:18)
Yes, they are. And it's not even as much the softness, it's the variability, too. And I think this is, as we get into help further up the kinetic chain, variability is such a massive thing that I like to hit on with people. People think soft is going to solve their issues, but the reality is tracks and treadmills cause more injuries than any other running surface out there.

Speaker 2 (12:39)
So you want something that has natural shape?

Speaker 1 (12:43)
Yeah, natural shape, unevenness. And in my opinion, that is one of the biggest keys to remaining injury-free, whether that's as a runner or just as a human. It's part of an exercise science degree. We do a bunch of anatomy stuff. And when you really look at the muscle structure of the human body, it is built to ambulate over uneven ground. That's how our whole muscle structure is set up. And what happens when we walk on a perfectly consistent, even surface, even if it's soft, is every step is the same, certain muscles get used, and then other muscles don't. And we develop these imbalances that then cause our hips, our low back, our knees, etc. To hurt. This is something to really think about in your daily life is spend as much time as possible on uneven ground or just go out of your way to do it. If Even if I'm running down the sidewalk, I make a point to step off on the curb so my hips tilt. Anything that makes your hips tilt is doing what your body has been designed to do for eons. I'll make a point. If I see a tree coming, I don't run around the tree.

Speaker 1 (13:45)
I duck under it. I lean one way or the other to go around the tree. Anything like that can make your hips tilt. Anything I see to step up on or step off of, I'm going to make a point to do that. Walking, running, it doesn't matter. Plus, it just makes life more playful. When life is more playful, life better.

Speaker 2 (14:00)
You found out that the five fingers were not the solution for everybody, so what did you do next?

Speaker 1 (14:06)
We found those to be a great solution for foot strengthening and to use in smaller amounts. They're fine for general lifestyle, but let's say you're doing a high impact activity, or in my case, I was training for a 50-mile race in the Rocky Mountains over technical terrain with sharp rocks. It's just not going to fly. In fact, it's dangerous and you'll probably break something. And so what really happened is that at the shop, we started filming people, and we do this thing. My dad's story is incredible. He blew his knee out playing football right at the end of his career, and this is why he didn't end up playing pro-baseball. He then got dared by his roommate's dad, dared them both to go do this thing. He's a huge weightlifter, always been great at anything he had done. This This roommate's dad says to him, Hey, I'm going to send you a postcard. And this postcard comes in the mail and it says, If you're a real man, you'll do this. And they looked at each other like, All right. They flipped the postcard over, Las Vegas Marathon. And it's in two months. My dad's like, 5'9, 240 pounds, just totally jacked.

Speaker 1 (15:20)
And because he blew his knee up playing football, we're talking unhappy triad, so no meniscus, bone on bone, just grinding. Doctors told him he'd never run again, he'd walk normal. That's been true to this day. My dad walks with a limp, and he's almost an inch shorter on that side as well, and goes out and tries to do this marathon, finishes. He's like the last at the very, very, very back, and it really pissed him off. For the first time in his life, he really sucked at something that he actually put a lot of effort into. On top of that, just excruciating knee pain. Just over and over does this. If you know the type of personality, just back at it a few weeks later. Mass with failure again, over and over. And he eventually sees a group of African Kenyan runners running. And these guys dominate distance running, if you know anything about distance running. And he's like, Oh, my gosh. I crashed down the road. We all crashed down the road. Those guys float. I now do something called float running, and I make this float run harness for this purpose. But he's like, Those guys float.

Speaker 1 (16:24)
I'll bet if I taught myself to run like them, my knee wouldn't hurt so bad. And sure enough, that's what he does. You fast forward seven years later, 110 pounds lighter, and he wins the St. George Marathon in 2 hours and 22 minutes.Unbelievable.It gets ranked as high as 17th in the country. I'm two at the time. Pretty cool.

Speaker 2 (16:43)
Tell me about the float running. What is float running?

Speaker 1 (16:46)
Float running is my method for making running techniques simple. The reality is most everybody in any other sport gets all sorts of training, and they spend most of their time on technique. You just think shooting a shot, passing the ball. There's a certain way you do this, throwing a football, kicking a soccer ball. There's just technique everywhere, swimming. Running is the only sport where we just tell people, Hey, good luck out there. I like to frame it for people. Imagine if your first day of swim practice was your first day of cross country or track practice. I'll tell you how my first day of cross country practice went, and I had a great coach, don't get me wrong. But it was, Hey, guys, welcome to class. Let's take roll. Okay, great. Housekeeping items. Okay, let's go for a run. I'll see you in 30 minutes. Okay, now let's do this at the swimming pool. Okay, just jump in. Good luck. See you in 30 minutes. Dead people, literally dead people. This is the only sport where we do this, and it's absurd. The problem is there's so much conflicting information out there on running technique, and there's not as much science as we'd like there to be.

Speaker 1 (17:55)
What is there is pretty solid, but it's shouted down by the money of the shoe companies. And overwhelmingly, most shoe companies just tell you, Oh, just go run however you want. Just do your thing.

Speaker 2 (18:11)
As long as you're wearing the shoes, you're protected and you're fine.

Speaker 1 (18:14)
Where are shoes? You're fine. Everybody has their own way of running. And don't get me wrong, there's some truth to that to a degree. But float running is my way of taking it and making it simple. So for basic running technique, we're not talking super in-depth stuff, but for most people, they need the basics. Every method out there that I know of has been too complicated. And so float running is a way of helping people master the basics of running technique very, very quickly. And the reason I do this harness here is it just hooks in underneath the arm pits, and it keeps your arms and your posture in position. And what people don't... Here's another thing that people don't realize about running is that it's largely driven by your posture your arms. And the thing I discovered over and over teaching running technique, night in, night out, from one-on-one to massive groups of people, hundreds of people, is that if we can get people to focus on keeping their elbow back and not letting their elbow come forward of their hips, everything just works. We're talking their cadence improves, their foot lands underneath the bent knee, underneath the backward traveling leg the way we want it to, their posture will be great, their airway will open.

Speaker 1 (19:29)
I We can almost distill down two hours of running technique class into, Hey, get your elbows back. Get those chicken wings, as I like to say it. If you get your elbow back, your posture is going to be good, your foot's going to land where it's supposed to. Your cadence is going to be higher like it needs to be, and everything just is so smooth and nice. And what the float run harness does is it provides tactile feedback. So you're not just thinking you're doing it right. It's letting you know you know you're doing doing it right, or, Hey, you're not doing it right. I'm giving you a tug that's saying, You're coming too far across your midline, or your left side is going one way and your right side isn't, or, You're pumping too far forward with your arms, or whatever. I would say 90 plus % of people need that tactile feedback. Even me, as somebody who's had running technique lessons and breakdown since I was age eight and been using devices along these lines since I was eight, still really helpful. I'll get out on a run or a race and use it, and I'm still picking up things.

Speaker 1 (20:29)
I'm like, Oh, I'm slipping there a little bit.

Speaker 2 (20:31)
When did you realize that the arms were such a key part?

Speaker 1 (20:35)
I would say probably 12 years ago, which is almost at the exact same time I started Altra. When we got into Altra, there was a lot of focus on bear foot, and there was a lot of focus on foot strike. And I would say now, the biggest thing that I tell people is, Don't focus on foot strike. And back then, everything from the media was like, Hey, just stop heel striking and everything will get better. And the reality is a lot of people stopped heel striking, and they started forefoot striking or doing something different, and everything else was still wrong. And so they just got different injuries. You just took the force off of maybe the knees, and you placed it on the feet. And so what we saw were a ton of foot injuries.Tell.

Speaker 2 (21:17)
Me the beginning of Altra. When did you realize you were going to start a shoe company as opposed to solving the problem of shoes for you to wear or your friends to wear?

Speaker 1 (21:28)
It was about A year and a half process of coming to just that realization that you pointed out there, because originally, Altra was a way to help our customers in our shop. We were taking traditional shoes, and we were cutting We were running the heavy elevated heel out of the back of the shoe, and we were leveling the shoe out front to back, and we were weight balancing it front to back. We were doing this because of my dad's experience. He attributed all his success as a runner learning to run like a Kenyan, this better running technique, right?

Speaker 2 (22:03)
And Kenyans learn to run barefoot.

Speaker 1 (22:06)
Correct. Yeah, so they develop great technique from a young age. And once you've really developed that technique in foot strength, then you can put on whatever you want, and it doesn't matter. You can overcome it, right? And this was the place we were coming from, except we were dealing with the opposite problem. Everybody in America grows up wearing shoes and they have weak feet, and we have to reverse engineer it, right? We have to go back and reteach them how to run well. And so when people would come into our shop, we would then teach them a lesson on how to run better. I had this realization, watching on a treadmill, we watched people run barefoot or in five fingers, and they looked great. Then that same person, 30 seconds later, in the very shoes we were selling them, looked like crap. We just had this thought of like, Oh, man. I remember my dad looks at me. He's like, I don't know if we're really helping people here. Again, that's a really bad place to be. Again, it's pretty soon after coming back from Hawaii. I just like, Yeah, it's pretty rough.

Speaker 2 (23:02)
You started by shaving the shoes and just modifying them so that they would perform better.

Speaker 1 (23:10)
Yeah, because I saw on video and by looking at the specs of the shoes and weighing them, that Every shoe in our store was heel heavy and heel high. None of these specs were published back then. Now we have a term for it drop. That was a term I invented, the term zero drop, again, one of my terms that everyone uses now. But at the time, This is like, wow, shoes are all heavy in the heel and they're all thick in the heel. We come to find out basically every shoe is twice as thick in the heel as it is in the forefoot. That's just how they're built. If it's a 12-millimetre forefoot, it's a 24-millimetre heel. If it's a 10-millimetre forefoot, it's a 20-millimetre heel. That's just how the cushioning was built in the shoe. And what we saw is people's foot swings out in front of their body. That causes the heel to drop. And in biomechanics, what we call dorsaflexing. So their toes pop up, their heel drops down. And then because the heel is thicker, the foot catches the earlier. So people are literally landing inches more out in front of their body than they were without a shoe on.

Speaker 1 (24:07)
So we're talking a fundamental movement that humans have done throughout all eons has now been disrupted not by millimeters, not by centimeters, but by inches. We wonder why running, which is a noncontact sport, has a 73% injury rate. Plus, depending on the study, 60% to 90% yearly. It's terrible for a sport with no contact. So did just what you said is I got looking at shoes and I was like, Well, what if we took a traditional amount of cushioning that still had enough protection to simulate running barefoot on a natural surface while you're on concrete or grass, or in my case, trail running on rocky ground? We have a moderate amount of protection there. And what if we get the shoe to weight balance front to back? What will happen? And so that's when I took the first pair of shoes into my toaster oven. Little mini oven, and I talked to my dad and told him what I was doing. He's like, Yeah, that makes sense. Just do it downstairs where mom can't smell it. I put this pair of shoes in the mini oven. And my dad was like, he's doing this stuff all the time, always modifying shoes growing up.

Speaker 1 (25:13)
He was working for Nike when I was born, sockoning most of my childhood. Modifying shoes was just something that happened at our house. He's like, Yeah, 275, wait till the glue bubbles. I'm like, Okay, cool. So 275. I wait a little bit long, melt the laces, melt all the TPU on the upper I mean, it's as Frankenstein as they come, right? It just looks terrible. But I take this shoe out and I rip the outsole off the rubber. Just pull the rubber off the shoe, pull the foam out. I put some slabs of weight balanced flat foam in, Spenco foam, and then glue the rubber back on. And I go for a run. And for the first time in my life, I'm running down the road, but I feel like I'm running barefoot on the grass. Or barefoot on the beach. Just that freedom. If you've ever run on the beach or barefoot on the grass, you know this freedom that comes with it. It's a glorious fun thing. I remember just thinking like, Oh, this is amazing. And let's get back and test it. So let's go video it in slow motion. Slow motion, video video had just become available to not rich people.

Speaker 1 (26:18)
And sure enough, the video was pretty clear that it was doing its job. We get that elevated heavy heel out of the equation and good things start to happen.

Speaker 2 (26:30)
How many of those modified pair of shoes did you make?

Speaker 1 (26:35)
So just a couple that way. And then I took a fleet to a guy that ran Rivers on the Grand Canyon with my dad that owned a shoe cobbler shop nearby, Robert Glazer, a village shoemaker. And I explained to him what I wanted to do. And he's looking at me and he's like, Look, he's like a third-generation shoemaker, certified pedorphist. And he's like, I usually add things to shoes, not take things away. He said, Why would you want to do this? I explained the biomechanics of it and how it's going to straight fix your posture and everything else and changes the way you walk, changes the way you run back to a more natural way. He starts shaking his head and giving me this look. I was like, Oh, man. He's like, Well, that sure makes a lot of sense. He ends up modding the shoes for me. I had brought him these original 1984 Saucony jazz originals that have two layers of midsole. They have one slab along the bottom, and there's a second slab that runs from the heel to the arch and then drops down to the forefoot. I just simply said, Hey, can you take the second slab out here?

Speaker 1 (27:38)
They're just level front to back, and then we'll see if we can get them to weight balance front to back. He was like, Yeah, I think we can pull that staff. And so we did about two dozen pair then, and we test them on our staff at the store, and 19 out of 20 loved it. I was like, Well, 95%, that's a pretty good rate. We don't see that very often. And then somehow a customer ended up in a pair. It might have been me. But this guy comes in, knee problems forever, just had been through the Ringer, tried everything, and he's like, What are you wearing? Because I'm wearing Frankenstein shoes. I was like, Well, we try to get the toes to spread out. We skip the laces in the front half of the shoe. I'm wearing something that helps me simulate being barefoot on natural surfaces. It seems to improve my running technique as well. He's like, Well, I've tried everything else. Let me try it. And I was like, Okay, fine. So he puts them on, goes for a run. He's gone a while. And I have this dude jacked my shoes moment because this occasionally happens at the shoe store.

Speaker 1 (28:41)
And it's a bad idea when you're dealing with us. We were all pretty fast people that worked at this shop. But I was like, He's been gone a long time. Dude, jacked my shoes. And he eventually comes back in and he's like, I'll take them. And I'm just like, Man, they're not for sale. These are Frankenstein shoes. At the time, we hadn't even called them zero drop shoes. We were calling them modified whatevers, jazzy zeros, modified jazzy zeros. And he's like, Well, I need a pair. Can you make me one? So I make this guy a pair and then swear him to secrecy because we don't want to get sued by the shoe companies. It's like we're taking their shoe and modifying it. Now we're past the statute limitations so we can talk about it. But it's just like, don't tell anybody. Do you know what happens when you tell people not to tell people things?word spreads.Yeah, exactly. We didn't think about this at the time, but next thing I know, it's a few weeks later, and this guy comes in and he's like, Who sold Joe the hacked-up shoes? And I'm like, Over here on the fit stool.

Speaker 1 (29:36)
Yeah, that was me. Sorry. He just looks at me and he's like, Sell me a pair, too. I've known that guy forever, and his knees have always hurt. Now they're feeling good, so I want some. And next thing you know, it's taken off like wildfire. We sell a thousand pair in a year. Just about a thousand pair in a year of these modified shoes where people are literally taking a brand new pair of shoes. They're paying us full price. Then they're paying another It's 20 to 50 bucks to have the cobbler hack them up, take them apart, level them out, weight balance them. And at the same time, we're selling them to people another size bigger, and we're skipping the laces in the front half to attempt somehow to get their toes to get in the game a little bit more. This is the journey, and back to your question, when did you know you had to start a shoe company? At this point, initially, there was no start a shoe company. We had great contacts with shoe companies, and we had all this research now. We had all this data because we were actually paying people $10 to bring back a survey after six weeks and tell us what happened.

Speaker 1 (30:36)
Did it get better? Did it get worse? What hurts more? What hurts less? What are you using more? What are you using less? Muscular? Where are you getting more sore, et cetera? You name it, 25 questions.

Speaker 2 (30:45)
You were doing this not for commercial reasons, but because you wanted to know what worked.

Speaker 1 (30:50)
Yeah, no, I just cared. I'm sick of selling people crap. You cared. Yeah, I totally cared. That was it at the time.

Speaker 2 (30:57)
You weren't doing market research for the market. You doing market research to understand what actually works.

Speaker 1 (31:03)
Yeah, well, and keep in mind, this is a more time-consuming process. We're actually net, we're probably losing money on the whole thing because we're spending more time trying to fit people. It's complicating everything. But we're all super stoked about it because we can tell it's making a difference, and we're fixing people. And the results we're getting are off the charts compared to anything we've ever seen. And we're seeing like 90 plus % success rates with your typical running injuries. So These surveys came back, really, five areas that were just incredibly successful. Plantar fasciosis, what we used to call plantar fasciitis, typical heel pain that people get, shin splints, runner's knee, IT band, and lower back issues. Two of those issues are not running things. Plantar fasciosis and lower back issues are not... Everybody deals with that stuff. We've got people going in and modifying every pair of shoes they own after a little bit. They're taking their whole closet in and saying, Expand my toe box, get rid of the heel elevation, weight balance the shoe. We've got the data now. We start pitching it to our contacts in the shoe industry and basically getting laughed off the street and ridiculed and just lots of nos across the board.

Speaker 1 (32:19)
I was like, Okay, so let me get this straight. We know people are getting... They're feeling better and they're less injured, and you don't care. I think now I look at it a little bit more compassion because I understand stocks and shareholders and stuff. But the answer I got across the board is like, Yeah, we just can't go there. And a lot of it, honestly, was we have our dedicated fan base who likes the shoes we make now, and we don't care that you're making something better. We got our people. And if you understand innovation theory, this is how it works with every innovation in every class out there. Basically, something new and better comes along, and it eventually wipes what was the top dog off the face of the planet because they won't change for that. But at the time, I remember just being so distraught and so frustrated that we were doing something that was really helping people. It was incredibly interesting. It was effective. And all these shoe companies that I grew up, darn near worshiping, didn't give a crap. And that was really hard for me at the time. And so it was during this time, this year-long acceptance very slow acceptance that we might have to do this.

Speaker 1 (33:34)
But the problem with doing it is, up to that point, we'd have the same seven running shoe companies since the beginning of running shoe time, basically. The quickest way to go homeless was start a shoe company. Start a running shoe company, you don't make it, you spend millions, you go homeless. That was the pattern, right? And what happened is, it was on my birthday, my cousin Jeremy comes over to my house and I say to him, tell him what I'm doing. He's like, Well, I haven't run in five years because my knees hurt. I'm like, Prove it. I'm like, Okay. We go for a run and I give him the hacked up modified zero drop shoes, and he's blown away. We get to a turnaround point. I'm like, okay, put regular shoes back on. And we run back and now his knee's killing him. And he's like, we have to do this. We got to make these things. I'm like, yeah, quickest way to go homeless. He's like, I'll do everything. You just design cool shoes and do the and the product, and I'll do everything. I'll find the people. I'll find the contacts, manufacturing, all that.

Speaker 1 (34:35)
I'm like, Okay, whatever, bro.

Speaker 2 (34:37)
Is that what happened? I don't even know how you start something like this.

Speaker 1 (34:41)
Neither did I. So basically what happened is initially, He has me make him a pair, but he comes back and he's like, Can you get me a real pair? I'm like, What do you mean a real pair? He's like, Well, not made by you. I'm like, Well, they don't exist. He's like, You mean to tell me there's no running shoes on the market that that are shaped like feet and keep your foot in barefoot position, don't have this elevated heel in them? I was like, No. He's like, That's preposterous. That's absolutely absurd. I don't believe you. I was like, What would I know? I just manage a shoe store. I'm like, Go do the research, man. My cousin, Jeremy Hallet, he does the research. He comes back and he's like, You're right, they don't exist. It's crazy. I was like, Yeah, it is crazy. Long story short, he finds these guys that find these guys that then find us. We're We're talking ex-Nike and Adidas development executives and the head of the kitchen at Nike, their advanced concepts team, head of development, Adidas, the first guy to ever do CAD, computer-animated design for shoes. These guys had this rapid prototyping group, and they were like, Hey, We thought about doing what you're doing, but we don't really have a marketing story, and you do with your running background and all this stuff.

Speaker 1 (35:52)
So let's get together. So we meet with these guys. Next thing we know, we're a million dollars in debt, and here I am today, and It is what it is.

Speaker 2 (36:01)
Tell me about the story of the growth of the company.

Speaker 1 (36:04)
Yeah. So Ultra is probably worth, I don't know, between 500 million and a billion dollars today. Started with nothing, essentially.

Speaker 2 (36:14)
How many years old is it now? When did you start?

Speaker 1 (36:16)
I started hacking shoes in 2008. We got the first shoes on the market in 2011. So we're looking at almost 13 years now. And we did 1.3 million year one.

Speaker 2 (36:26)
When you started, did you just have one model?

Speaker 1 (36:29)
Yes. We started with this model called the Instinct. It was just a road running shoe, crossover shoe, moderate cushion. Again, just simulate running barefoot on natural terrain. I think you have a pair of Escalantes now. The Escalante in the line now is probably the closest thing to what the Instinct was back then. The Instinct was probably a little bit more, a little more shoe, I would say, just a little bit, but very similar. Then we built the Loan Peek, which has been the number one trail shoe in America repeatedly and is a household name shoe that still exists today. That came out in November, so about six, seven, eight months after the Instinct. We also built a shoe called the Adam and the Eve, the men's and woman's version. These were barefoot style shoes, similar to Five Fingers, just without the toe pockets. That was the initial lineup that first year.

Speaker 2 (37:17)
When you guys started, no one was doing either zero drop or natural wide toe box running shoes?

Speaker 1 (37:25)
Not with any cushion. Yeah. Really, it was five fingers. So you had the five-toe shoes. About the same time we launched, some of the minimalist shoes came on. Those were non- cushioned, barefoot style shoes. Most did not have an appropriate toe box, what I'd call foot-shaped toe box, but some did. After that, originally that first year, we're out there pitching at the running shoes stores, and everybody's like, Well, what's with the barefoot style shoes with cushioning? Or what's with the running shoes without the heel and with the big clown-shaped toe box? We were creating a category because it simply didn't exist at all. I'm a big believer in doing this. You want to create something that people don't even know they need. You want to create a solution that is so good that people are like, Wow, I never thought about that before. We've always been very anti-trend. I always had this philosophy of, let's create the trend, basically. And now, I'm not at Alter anymore. It's a publicly traded company, and that philosophy may or may not exist into the future. Being a publicly traded company, probably not. But that was always the mindset from the get-go.

Speaker 2 (38:35)
Yeah, I wanted to talk to you because when I got the shoes, I never felt comfortable shoes before in my life. And it's just a radical experience to feel something that feels like it belongs on your foot as opposed to all the shoes that don't.

Speaker 1 (38:50)
Yeah, and I appreciate you saying that. My goal was always like, they should disappear.

Speaker 2 (38:54)
Yeah. When did the book Born to Run come out during your story?

Speaker 1 (38:59)
So Born to Run came out just as I was in Hawaii when Born to Run hit. So Born to Run had been a thing for a couple of years before I started hacking up shoes. And we had been selling the Five Fingers at our store for a couple of years, and we knew they were a great tool. We also just knew the average person couldn't handle them, and they weren't practical for hard flat manmade surfaces, and they weren't practical for technical trail. And so that was the frame. But Born to Run definitely built a foundation and helped bring an awareness there. And I still talk to Chris to this day.

Speaker 2 (39:35)
I love Born to Run. It's interesting. I don't think I ever read a book. I certainly never read a book about running before, but I don't think I read any book about any sport before just because I'm not interested. A friend of mine said, You got to read this book. I read the book. It made me cry. It was beautiful. Amazing book.

Speaker 1 (39:56)
Amazing book, yeah. I think I wanted to create that experience experience that people had reading Born to Run in shoe form. For me, Alter was so much more than shoes. Our first investor and my mentor, Joe Morton, he always said to me, The shoes are great, but the education is another component of this that's so big. Actually teaching people how to move properly and teaching people to strengthen their feet. You're providing more than a shoe to people. You're providing people an experience. That was really for me the goal of doing it. That's really what I'm doing with PR gear now is I'm doing this other stuff that really allows me to focus on that other stuff because there are-The teaching part. Yeah, there are shoes out there, but there's some accessories and things people need and education that people need to make this easier. People's feet are deformed. I'm a huge proponent of correct toes that we sell. And correct toes are a way for people to get their deformed feet back to looking like natural, happy, healthy human feet.

Speaker 2 (40:58)
Are those yoga Kind of, except you wear them inside foot-shaped shoes, so you can actually wear them while you're active.

Speaker 1 (41:07)
I tell people they're an arch support, they're an ankle brace, and they are a pronation optimizer. Until you've put them on, you just don't understand it. But at my family's shoe store, we have people do a balance test without them on. Most people's feet, again, their big toe is bent in, their toes touch, which natural human feet, your toes really shouldn't be touching. Then we put them in a pair of correct toes and have them do a balance test.

Speaker 2 (41:31)
So the toes want to look almost like fingers.

Speaker 1 (41:34)
Yeah, your toes should be spaced. They should be spread apart. And certainly, if they're not, they should be able to do so. The biggest thing we see with people as they age is their feet are not stable and they fall. And falls kill lots of elderly people. And there's actually tons of studies supporting this. We get people out of big fat cushy shoes that are stabilizing and deforming their feet, and we get them into barefoot style footwear, and we get their toes to spread out, and they stop falling over. And I was referencing the balance test we do at the shop because we'll have people, and it can be somebody who's 70 years old that can't balance on one foot. We put a pair of correcto on them, and instantly, their balance improves dramatically. And people literally look at me and they're like, Okay, what voodoo magic did you just do on me? That's just one example. The other thing we do, we do these bridge soles, and they have a Met pad in them. And a lot of people don't even know what a Met pad is, but But a Met pad sits as a cushion back behind your metastarsal heads or your forefoot.

Speaker 1 (42:35)
Most shoes are concave, left to right. So your shoe is higher on the right side and the left side than it is in the middle. As your shoe wears out, it gets even more so. What happens is your foot ends up in this position where your middle met heads or the middle part of your forefoot is down.

Speaker 2 (42:52)
Like sway back.

Speaker 1 (42:54)
Yeah, exactly. What happens with a Met pad is you put a Met pad in a shoe and it actually fills that gap and it puts your forefoot back into natural position. And bridgeholes are named this way because they're a bridge from traditional footwear to more natural footwear. So a lot of people will have a tough time with that transition. Some people it's really easy for, other people it's just like they don't have the foot strength. And if they reduce their cushion too much, which most people do, they have issue. And so these bridgeholes are a bridge from traditional footwear to natural footwear, and they just make that transition nice and seamless for people. And then we give them the education.

Speaker 2 (43:28)
What are the best foot exercises?

Speaker 1 (43:31)
The biggest, if you have to really distill it down, I would say the single best thing people could and should be doing, the easiest one is just go jog barefoot on the grass or sand. Single best foot exercise you can do. If you If you're not able to do that, and that's not easy, you probably should do this anyway, is what's called a single leg heel float. It's simply balancing on one foot. If you can comfortably balance on one foot, then you pull your heel slightly off the ground. We're talking quarter to a half inch max. You sit and balance. The nice thing with this exercise, you may or may not have picked this up for me. I'm a very moderate approach guy. I hate the extremes because people get excited about that stuff, but it's not practical. I'm super practical. The nice thing with single leg heel floats, you can do it anywhere. You can do a single leg heel float waiting in line to pay for your groceries. Just balance on one foot, pull that heel slightly up off the ground. Once you get decently good at it, no one has to know what's happening.

Speaker 1 (44:26)
That single leg balancing is a huge foot strength of the exercise. Obviously, going to be more effective done barefoot and even more effective done barefoot with correct toes in. That's the key one. Then I just like to use a little elastic band of some sort and walk with an elastic band around the big toes. So it's pulling the big toes away from your feet and towards each other. Anything to help those feet re-approximate, basically, because for decades, most of us have been in shoes that bend the big toes away from each other. And the more your big toe is bent away from the other big toe, the more problems you tend to have, the less your arch works, et cetera.

Speaker 2 (45:07)
So zero drop means the heel is level with the front of the foot, correct?

Speaker 1 (45:13)
Yeah. So the whole idea was like a typical shoe would drop from the heel down to the forefoot.

Speaker 2 (45:19)
Understood.

Speaker 1 (45:20)
And so I should tell you the story of how this came about. So I'm at the shoemaker when I was first doing this, and we would actually measure the thickness the midsole that was left. I would talk about how it was dropping from the heel to the forefoot. Robert Glazer, the shoemaker, he'd have these millimeter rulers, and he'd sit here and he'd measure how thick it was here and how thick it was here. He'd be like, Okay, it's still dropping 2 millimeters from the heels of the forefoot. I'm like, Okay, good. Sand 2 more millimeters out. We'd send two more millimeters out, and we're calling them hacked-up modified shoes, right? Then he sends two out, and we remeasure it, and he's like, Okay, it's dropping 0 millimeters. I'm like, Robert, you're a genius. We don't have to call them hacked-up modified shoes anymore. We'll call them zero drop shoes. It sounds cool.

Speaker 2 (46:08)
It's what they are. It's great.

Speaker 1 (46:10)
I think the great irony of it is the term caught on long before Altra did. Like I said, we sold $1.3 million worth of Altras the first year. Well, that's nothing compared to the term zero drop went into usage among the Born to run community instantly. It was just like everybody was using it. It was really a term to describe cushioning of the shoe. The cushioning was no longer dropping from the heel of the forefoot. Then all these minimalist, barefoot style shoes came out with no cushioning, and they started calling themselves zero drop shoes. I just had to get a chuckle because it actually created an uphill battle for ultra at Run Specialty because people started associating zero drop with no cushion. It was really a term to actually describe the cushioning of the shoe originally.

Speaker 2 (46:55)
Is there a benefit in being as close to the ground as possible in your flat position?

Speaker 1 (47:01)
It's very situational, and I would say it relates to impact and it relates to activity. For example, I am sitting here talking to you barefoot right now. There's no reason for me to have a shoe on. There's no benefit from having a shoe on. I want to remove anything possible. Also, if you're familiar with grounding, there's incredible benefits with just letting your body ground with the Earth. A lot of people think that's hooky stuff. But just letting your foot connect with the Earth. There are studies that show there's a much bigger electron transfer happening there. You get these ions that are transferring it. It's much better. A lot of health benefits with grounding. I would say for casual usage, yeah, you want to have as little to no cushion as possible. If you're not challenging your feet, if you're not doing something that's difficult for your feet, I don't see any reason. You're going to be the closer you are to the ground, the more stable you're going to be, period. Sports cars are low and wide for a reason. I always tell people, You only use the least amount of cushioning that's necessary for what you're doing and trying to accomplish.

Speaker 1 (48:02)
For me, I go for a one-mile run around my neighborhood. I don't really need a shoe on for that. I go for a five-mile trail run across rocky terrain with mud. I probably want lugs for grip, and I probably want some rock protection in the form of cushioning or a rock plate to blunt the rocks and make it easier for me to do that safely and quickly. Now, I go run a 100-mile race. It's really hard to prepare your feet to go 100 miles. At least in the modern world. Having a big, fat, thick, cushy shoe can actually be helpful at the 100-mile distance for a lot of people. There are people that take years and train their feet and get their feet really strong and can do 100-mile race in no cushioning, but they're one in a billion.

Speaker 2 (48:48)
How often have you done a 100-mile race over the course of your life?

Speaker 1 (48:52)
I stop at 50.

Speaker 2 (48:54)
Fifty is your number.

Speaker 1 (48:55)
Once I get a little bit older and I lose my fast twitch, I'll probably move up and do hundreds. But I like to run still. And the reality is even the elites are not really running at the 100-mile distance. They're running the downhills, they're running some of the flats. Almost everybody's powerhiking the uphills, and speed is not as much as It's all relative, I guess. But for me, I can run quickly at the end of a 50-mile race. I've run a 5:45 mile at the end of a 50-mile race.

Speaker 2 (49:24)
Wow.

Speaker 1 (49:25)
I've run a 36-minute 10K at the end of a 50-mile race. Wow. Nobody's doing that in 100 miles.

Speaker 2 (49:32)
Tell me what it's like to do a 50-mile race. What's the mindset?

Speaker 1 (49:36)
I always tell people, If you're on a trail run, you should approach it like hiking. The mindset is hiking. I'm going hiking, I'm just doing it faster. For most people, it means you're going to hike the uphill. You're going to jog the flat, and you're going to run the down. Also, it's an eating contest. If you've read Born to Run, you hear them talk about this, but it's almost as much more about who has the awesome stomach as it is about who has the awesome lakes because you have to fuel. You can get through a marathon without fueling extensively, but you go much beyond that and you're a dead person walking if you can't fuel properly. For me, the mindset is like, I'm going to go do this somewhere incredibly beautiful because I want to experience this beauty. I'd love to do it fast. I'm going to eat stuff that I like, and I'm going to have a great time with it. The mindset is like, for me, survive for 37 miles, and then get down to business for the last half marathon. For me, that's an hour and a half, and it's go time now.

Speaker 2 (50:36)
What do you do for food?

Speaker 1 (50:37)
I actually train my stomach. When I first started doing this, I would drink orange juice right before going, really acidic. Then I'd stop at 7:11 along the way and get mini tacos and pizza and burgers and anything else, just horrible food that I wouldn't normally eat in normal life, really. But I did it to train my stomach because I know the stomach is probably the single greatest issue It's an issue for most people running ultra distances.

Speaker 2 (51:01)
You get nauseous or what is it?

Speaker 1 (51:03)
You get nauseous, you have a hard time holding food down, you have a hard time getting enough in. I've always been of the mindset, for example, my first marathon, the mindset was like, Well, when I went to run my first marathon, I had already done things harder than the actual marathon. So the race didn't actually seem that hard. And that was the mindset I really took into to ultras as well. It was like, Okay, this eating situation, let's make it harder than it's going to be on race day so that race day isn't so tough, basically. Training your stomach is a real thing. It's a huge thing.

Speaker 2 (51:37)
I never heard of that before. I never heard of training your stomach in that way.

Speaker 1 (51:41)
It's interesting. Yeah, and it's such a big one. People don't talk about it enough, but the reality is you're burning 200 to 400 calories an hour or more, and you got to replace at least a couple of hundred of that to have any chance of performing optimally. So learn to eat whatever. And ultra-aid stations are beautiful things. You just go in and it's like there's something for everybody. For me, I'm usually grabbing some soda, a handful of peanut M&Ms, beef, turkey, bacon, pancakes, grilled cheese sandwich, quesadillas, you name it. Just grab it, put it in your pockets, roll, and then just eat while you're going, things. It's just a mobile food party at the end of the day.

Speaker 2 (52:24)
What's the first pushback you get from your body? It's like, something in me doesn't like doing this.

Speaker 1 (52:31)
Sometimes it's your stomach. Sometimes it's like, I don't want to eat that. I don't feel like drinking more. You know, I have to do this. If I do not get in this amount of calories, I will not keep going at the same rate Or if I do not drink, I will dehydrate and cause a problem. That's really all an issue. Dehydration is massively overrated, in my opinion, especially shorter races. It's really difficult to dehydrate in under three hours, for example, which is... I run marathons in about two and a half hours, so dehydration is not something I face at that level. But at the longer levels, that can be a thing. But I would say in ultra distances, there's these ebbs and flows of just fatigue. At first, it's probably physical fatigue where you just can't hold the pace you want to hold and your legs are just like, Sorry, bro, it's not happening today. But then you come out of it. It's like you just suck it up for an hour and the next thing you know, it's like, We're flying again. You've been fueling, so it happens. Towards the end of the race, It's actually more like your brain is like, What is happening?

Speaker 1 (53:33)
We're fatigued out here. We're done. We're fried. It doesn't want to believe anymore. It's really this roller coaster of, I would say, both physical roller coaster, but an emotional roller coaster. I think that's why people get addicted to it. I don't really promote it. If we're running for health, we should be running 5Ks. Running somewhere between a mile fast and three miles fast and training for that is the optimal thing to be doing for your health. But there is It's something about the challenge of running 50 miles in the mountains or 50K or 100 miles or whatever that people love. And part of it is just this emotional roller coaster and this physical roller coaster that happens where you literally think, I'm dead, I'm done, I'm done. I'm quitting. It's over. And an hour later, you're back on top of the world.

Speaker 2 (54:21)
Amazing.

Speaker 1 (54:22)
And then an hour later, you might be dead, done, and quitting for real. But who knows? That's a fun piece of things for sure that I think leads to the addiction of ultra running because it's really not that healthy of an activity, in my opinion. But so many of these races are just in jaw-dropingly beautiful places. And this combination of beautiful place with incredible life experience of these roller coasters is powerful.

Speaker 2 (54:51)
Is there anything about body type for running? Some people say if you're over a certain amount of weight, running is not for you. Better to walk. Is any of that true?

Speaker 1 (55:01)
I mean, maybe at a certain size when you get really, really big, but for the most part, no. It's interesting. I think people have this misunderstanding that if you're taller, you're going to be a better runner. Well, the average marathon champion is male as 5, 6, and 12 pounds. So tall is actually not an advantage, typically. Your marathon and underrunners tend to be smaller at the elite levels, but a lot of your elite ultra runners are pretty big. And it's actually helpful to have more muscle mass and fat storage to go off of for these longer distances. And you may not see that as much in the elite of the elite, but everything from good to elite, I would say on average, the athletes who are a little bit bigger tend to do a little bit better in these longer distances, which is an interesting thing. But yeah, for general people running, if we give people the right technique, they tend to be fine. And I I find that people that are heavier tend to adopt better technique easier. They haven't learned as bad of habits, and their body naturally is like, We got a lot of weight hit in the ground here.

Speaker 1 (56:10)
We need to spend more mind power and emphasis on protecting ourselves. And they can overcome their bad shoes more than the average person might be able to, which is an interesting thing for sure.

Speaker 2 (56:22)
You mentioned grounding earlier. Did you ever consider making the Ultras groundable?

Speaker 1 (56:29)
Yeah, My sister, very early on, was like, You should put grounding plugs in Ultras. It was like,. At the time, we were mostly only making running shoes. That's like half an hour out of the day for most people. People can ground any other time of the day. They can take their shoes off before or after their run and get the benefits that way. From an engineering standpoint, it was difficult, and a marketing standpoint, very challenging to tell that story. It didn't get off the ground, but it was definitely considered and It didn't quite make it to prototype stage, but it was in development stage for sure.

Speaker 2 (57:04)
If you were to do it, how would you do it?

Speaker 1 (57:06)
There are shoes today that have grounding plugs in them, and they run a copper interface from the middle of the shoe. The copper touches the ground and it runs to something that then connects with the foot. The foot is on something that's touching the copper interface, which is then running a line down to the ground. We're getting pretty extreme on the fringes here, but that's what people do. Cool. I think it's really interesting. It's not something I've played a whole lot with, but fun to think about, at least.

Speaker 2 (57:36)
When you started your shoe company, what was the first competition you had in foot-shaped shoes?

Speaker 1 (57:43)
Even today, there's really only one other brand making cushioned foot-shaped running shoes, which is fascinating and saddening at the same time to me. I would say these days, and even all along, I have not always just been a pure I'm not ultra advocate, but I've been an advocate for healthy footwear. This is why I sit on the executive board of the Healthy Foot Alliance and I promote shoes besides ultra. Love ultra, don't get me wrong. But I want people in whatever foot-shaped, natural, zero-drop shoe is going to be best for them. Yeah, there's just one other brand out there right now, at least with any cushioning. I wish there were more, frankly. I still remember when this other brand came out, and my buddy that helped me start the company as well, Brian Bextead, I remember him just being pissed. He was just like, Can't believe those guys just ripped off our Instinct shoe and made their own and slapped their brand on it. And it's actually the guy that started Five Fingers in the US doing this. And him and I, we're good friends and we get along. I remember thinking like, Awesome. They just totally legitimized us.

Speaker 1 (58:47)
They just made us look legit.

Speaker 2 (58:49)
Yeah, now it's a real format.

Speaker 1 (58:53)
Yeah, and I think part of it, though, is it's really hard to engineer this because shoe lasts at the factories, these foot forms that the shoe were built around, they all come with heel elevation.I see.They all start tapered. When we did this, I had to engineer these last from the ground up. We had to literally build an entirely new shape that had never existed before.

Speaker 2 (59:12)
A last is a plastic foot.

Speaker 1 (59:15)
Plastic or metal foot form, yeah.

Speaker 2 (59:18)
It's like a mannequin foot, essentially.

Speaker 1 (59:20)
Yeah, except all other shoes, it's super pointy.

Speaker 2 (59:24)
Yeah.

Speaker 1 (59:24)
And so we had to go in and make an actual one that looked like a foot in a sock, basically. That's actually how we got the shapes for the first altars is I literally took a bunch of healthy feet. My mindset was like, Okay, people that get injured, I'm not going to use them. I was talking to people that never got injured. I was like, Okay, you've never had any foot problems. You never get injured. Let me trace your feet. Wear your socks because you wear socks when you wear shoes, and we're going to trace your feet and see what those shapes look like.

Speaker 2 (59:49)
Based on the length of a foot, how much difference is there in the width of the front of the foot from person to person?

Speaker 1 (59:56)
A lot. Really? Yeah. People have massive variability It's very, very difficult to fit everybody. You do the best you can, try and get in the middle of that bell curve as much as possible.

Speaker 2 (01:00:09)
But that said, it's better for the foot box to be too big than too small.

Speaker 1 (01:00:13)
Yeah, and that's actually a big point as a shoe, when I'm actually selling a shoe or fitting somebody for a shoe, the first thing I'm going to tell them is, you want your shoe to disappear. The shoe that's best for you is the shoe that feels the least there, and it should feel too big in the toes. If If it doesn't feel too big in the toes, it's too small. I will just emphasize that over and over, and I'd like to push it a little bit far with people because most people can't grasp this. Since we have been little kids, our parents have told us to put our shoes on and tie them up tight and make sure they're secure. That's so bad for blood flow, it's bad for foot health. The reality is when your toes learn to spread out and do their thing, they stabilize in the shoe. I don't even lace my shoes anymore. The only time I'll lace them is when I'm running super technical trail or I'm doing really fast speed work. Even then, if I don't lace my shoes, my foot can go to roll or my shoe can, and my foot will be like, No, I'm good.

Speaker 1 (01:01:09)
The toes will spread out and do their thing where the shoe does something you may not want it to do, for example. That's just a cool thing that human body does once you get it back being a human body.

Speaker 2 (01:01:21)
When you say you don't lace them, do you mean you don't have laces in them at all or you don't tie them?

Speaker 1 (01:01:26)
I'll put my foot in the shoe, and then I'll pull my foot I'll put most of the way out of the shoe. I'll take it, and before my heel comes all the way out of the shoe, then I'll tie the shoe nice and tight. Then I'll put my foot back in the shoe at that point in time. From then on, that shoe is a slip-on. I see. I I tie it on, I slide it on, I slide it off. I never tie it, I never untie it until it just randomly comes untied at some point in time.

Speaker 2 (01:01:51)
So it comes on and off like a boot.

Speaker 1 (01:01:52)
Yeah, a boot or a slipper. I think people like this idea of not having to tie their shoes. For sure. For a lot of people, they have to rewire their brain again because they've just been taught, My shoes should be tight. It's uncomfortable to them for their heel to slip up and down a little bit at first. But again, the reality is once you get used to this, it's far more comfortable. You get better blood flow. It helps everything heal. Your foot stabilizes better. It's just a better way to be doing things.

Speaker 2 (01:02:18)
What's your feeling about socks or no socks?

Speaker 1 (01:02:20)
Personal, I'll say my feet stink. If I don't wear Moreno Wolf socks, it's bad for people around me. But the biggest problem with socks is socks deform your feet, too. If If you've ever put a nice pair of socks up next to your foot, it's like half the size of your foot. Well, that's going to pull your toes together. In my opinion, socks are almost as responsible for foot deformation as shoes are. The biggest thing, if you're going to wear socks and that's your preference, buy them a size bigger than the package says. That's all. For example, I'm a size 9 foot. I wear a size 10 shoe. I wear socks for a size 13 to 15.

Speaker 2 (01:02:57)
Wow.

Speaker 1 (01:02:58)
And they fit great. The thing I always have people do is just take your sock and hold it up next to your foot. My foot, even with the size 13 to 15 sock, my foot is still longer than my sock is. It's a ridiculous thing when you really think about it. If you don't want to deform your feet and you want your feet to be healthier, use a sock that's bigger.

Speaker 2 (01:03:20)
Tell me more about the first year of Altra. How did you distribute them?

Speaker 1 (01:03:24)
Brian, Jeremy, and I went and knocked on the door of running stores everywhere. We went to trade shows. We cold-called. There's about a thousand running stores in America. I've been in close to 700 of them, personally. The approach was basically, we manage shoe stores. Here's what other shoes do. This is why we think we make something that could be an advantage to you, and you should carry it.

Speaker 2 (01:03:50)
And what percentage of people were interested?

Speaker 1 (01:03:52)
I'd say maybe one in three, one in four would pick it up in the first year or so after we met with Probably only one in 20 that was on the spot, Yes, let's go. So it was a lot of a lot of rejection. But as the years go on and the science is what it is, and people see it more and get more familiar with it, then it It was easier. I still remember some of these guys calling back that may have been really harsh to us early on and just totally dismissive and calling back to get an account. Sometimes I'd be like, make them sweat a little bit. Don't improve that account for a a few weeks. I'm not vindictive by any means, but I do like to have fun with people. If you made me sweat for a few years, I might make you sweat for a couple of weeks.

Speaker 2 (01:04:39)
Was there a moment in time where it felt like it really shifted to being beyond your dream Are you still successful?

Speaker 1 (01:04:46)
No, still not there. To be honest, I remember being at SGB 40 Under 40. We were nominated and were inducted into the 40 Under 40, and that's these 40 business leaders 40 years old. And it's this big deal in the business world, whatever. I don't really care about this stuff. But I remember being asked this question, and they're like, So when did Alter become bigger than you thought it would be? I still remember Brian and Jeremy looking at each other and we're like, It's not. We thought it'd be bigger. It wasn't the product, it was the whole back-end side of the business, the accounting, the shipping, the delivery, the customs, just the nuts and bolts, the organization of the business that really held us back from being bigger, in my opinion. At least that first 5, 6, 7 years. I thought we'd be bigger after four or five years than Altra is now, frankly.Wow.I probably didn't see us being as big as we became in the thru-hiking community. That one took off really quick, and it was in that first, probably four years, we became the number one shoe on all the long trails. So people hiking Canada, Mexico, hands down, Altras are the highest shoe there.

Speaker 1 (01:05:58)
And the ultra-marathoning world that came really fast, too. There's not a lot of those people in the grand scheme of things, but we did dominate that market pretty quick. And the trail market was about where we had... I think the original vision was like, we ended up being in trail running where we thought we'd be overall, and that's still catching up today.

Speaker 2 (01:06:19)
Yeah, I imagine it catching up because, again, once you wear the shoes, it'd be hard to put on any other shoes.

Speaker 1 (01:06:26)
I think where people miss the boat and where that ends up not being true is runners are very beholden to marketing and technology, and they're all about fast. And the irony is we've got these super shoes now, and Alter makes a super shoe called the Vanish Carbon El, that's fantastic. But these super shoes, for the most part, they're engineered to make you run faster, but they're also engineered to injure you. And we're seeing an epidemic of runners that are running a lot of miles in these super shoes. They have these really explosive foams. They're super bouncy. But the problem they tend to amplify anything you do wrong as well. So what goes down has to come back up, right? And with these explosive foams, it gets amplified that much more. And so we're seeing this epidemic of injuries. This is where road runners are just so beholden to this. And the best super shoes are on average making people 1-2 seconds faster a mile. And for reference, our float run harnesses that we make, our average reviewer is saying they get 30 seconds faster a mile. You pay 12 bucks for a floatrun harness or spend $300 to $500 on a pair of super shoes.

Speaker 1 (01:07:33)
Your choice. One will get you more injured and the one will get you less injured. And it's the cheaper one that gets you less injured. But the thing there is runners are so beholden to that. And all the marketing is there. All the dollars are spent there. And so where we get into a problem is people go after that stuff. And also doing this stuff that we're talking about, getting your foot back into its natural position, is far more important for all day, every day, than it is for the 30 minutes a day you run. You have some ultramarathoners that run for an hour plus a day, some elite road runners or higher-level road runners that run more than an hour a day. But for the average person out there, they're running 10 to 30 minutes a day. You're going to get a lot more benefit having your foot in natural position for all day, every day, than you are just for running. I always tell people, at the end of the day, running what you want, you're biomechanically going to be better, you're going to injured in a pair of foot-shaped zero drop cushion shoes.

Speaker 1 (01:08:33)
But what you wear all day, every day, getting your foot back into its natural position is going to be a lot more important.

Speaker 2 (01:08:40)
It would be better to wear altras or be barefoot during the day than the little bit of time that you're exercising. Absolutely.

Speaker 1 (01:08:48)
Yeah, 100%. That's where I think people miss the boat, in my opinion. At Alter, we used to do something where we called it the Month-Long Foot-Shaped Challenge. We challenged people to wear nothing but foot-shaped shoes for a month. And that included your casual wear as much as your running wear. And when those people did that, it was exactly what you said. Those people that actually took the foot-shaped challenge, very few of them went back to regular shoes at that point in time. But the people that still wore what I would call modern, traditional shoes all day and occasionally ran in Altras, it wasn't as hard for them to go back.

Speaker 2 (01:09:28)
Do the great runners tend to be great runners naturally, or is it more based on stuff that they've learned?

Speaker 1 (01:09:35)
Sprinters are almost completely genetic. You could have the greatest coach in the world, the greatest nutrition, the greatest training, and you're either born a great sprinter or you're not. I think the most beautiful thing about distance running is that anybody can be really good. Now, can anybody make it to the Olympics? Probably not. You're born an Olympian or not to a degree. But for the most part, with distance running, you get in what you put out. This is something my dad has always loved because he came from this non-running background. He came from being a weightlifter, essentially, and a really big guy. You put the work in, you get it out. It doesn't really matter who you are. It doesn't matter what your genetics are. Anybody can be respectable. I love that, too, personally. There's not a lot of sports like that, frankly. It's probably the least genetic-based sport I can think of.

Speaker 2 (01:10:27)
What's your feeling on heart rate training I'm a math disciple.

Speaker 1 (01:10:31)
Math is Phil Mappetone's method to a degree. I'm basically a believer in training at a really low heart rate for the bulk of my mileage. The number one cause of running injuries is supposedly overtraining. It's training with the It's a long technique. It's straining your body too much. I guess in that sense, it's overtraining. And the best way to come back overtraining and therefore running injuries is just to freaking slow down. It should be enjoyable. I don't know really always how to explain it to people, but I I know that when I tell them to do it, almost everybody comes back to me and is like, Well, I have to walk at that heart rate, or that's too slow. I don't feel like I'm running. It's like, Yeah, well, that's how it is at first. Then your body adapts. Next thing you know, you're running at that same heart rate a few months later, and you're going a lot faster. For me, I describe it like this. Sometimes my wife will call me while I'm out on a run. A few minutes into my run, she'll be like, Are you running right now? That's a good way to describe if you're at the right heart rate most of the time, is somebody could give you a call on the phone and they might not know you're running for a while.

Speaker 1 (01:11:36)
It might take them a while before they're like, Oh, you're out running, aren't you? What people don't understand with this is the way the aerobic engine is built, it doesn't matter whether you're running at the top end of your aerobic zone or the bottom end of your aerobic zone. You get the same benefit either way. So you might as well run slower and put more volume in, which also does less muscle damage, which means you're more recovered so that when you do want to to go fast or hard, you're more fresh and able to do that. So essentially, you get the same benefit. You can put in more volume, and you're fresher to hit it harder when you want to hit it harder. And that's why it works. And I don't hear a lot of people talk about that why of the component. And I'm a big why guy.

Speaker 2 (01:12:15)
When did you first hear about Phil Mappetone?

Speaker 1 (01:12:18)
My mom went to a Mappetone coaching thing when I believe Sokny, who was her sponsor at the time, probably early '90s sometime, probably somewhere around the time I ran my first marathon Marathon, and it took a while, and I probably didn't fully embrace it all the way until about the time I started ultra, again. I haven't had a major running injury since that time. It's been 13 years now, and I've never had an IT band injury or a knee injury or shin splints or runner's knee or any of this stuff.

Speaker 2 (01:12:51)
Tell me about your first marathon.

Speaker 1 (01:12:52)
When I think about it, I feel like I'm talking about somebody else's life. Maybe it's because when you run long distance, you burn brain cells, and I just burned too many brain cells running as a young kid. My parents, they had read that the longer kids crawl, the more intelligent they'd be. There were some studies on this. And so they always pushed me down whenever I stand up to walk. And I just got pushed down all the time as a toddler. And one day, they set me outside the car and didn't realize there was a playground there. And I had never walked before, but supposedly, I took off running and ran to the playground before I had ever done any extensive walking. I'd maybe got a step, two, three steps in before I got knocked over. That was me running before I walked, supposedly. Again, I don't remember this. I ran at a young age. My parents were race directors, so put races on. I ended up running races. I just liked it. When I was eight, I won the World Youth Championships, and it was like this was a shorter race, like 3K, I think.

Speaker 1 (01:13:53)
It was like, what's next? My next door neighbor was an Olympic trials qualifier as well in the marathon. My mom was a multi-time Olympic trials qualifier. My mom was the state record holder in the marathon. My dad was elite as well. I remember just thinking, well, the St. George Marathon is the thing. They do Boston and stuff, too, but really, at least in my circle, St. George Marathon was the thing everybody keyed in on. If you're not familiar with this, St. George is down by Las Vegas, Nevada. Beautiful red rock scenery. It's basically a road marathon that looks It's like it should be a trail race. It's just gorgeous start to finish. And I was like, Well, everybody else does that. I want to do that. I was like, Hey, dad, I want to run the St. George. He's like, You're eight. No. And so that year, I turned nine and that year at St. George, the youngest runner wins the Performance of the Day trophy, which is the 6-foot-tall trophy. And I'm telling you, to a little sought-off run, 4-foot-tall, nine-year-old runner, there is nothing more a 6-foot-tall trophy. That is the pinnacle of life at that point in time.

Speaker 1 (01:15:04)
I just remember turning to my dad, I'm watching the awards from him. This kid was 12, ran 4.5-hour marathon, which is super impressive. I just remember turning to my dad and just be like, If you were to let me run, I would have got that cool trophy. I never let it go. I just kept pestering him and pestering him. The next spring, at one point, he was just like, Fine, fine. Just leave me If you run rim to rim in the Grand Canyon, harder than a marathon, and you run up Mount Timpanoagos and back, also harder than a marathon, and do these other couple of things that are marathon equivalents, basically, I'll let you run the marathon. And I really think the thinking at the time was like, he'll realize that this is a horrible idea, that this is super painful and it takes a ton of commitment. And he'll try to do one of these things and just pull the plug and go back to running short stuff or I'm playing basketball. I played a ton of basketball and football as a kid. I'm messed up because I liked it. In fact, we went and ran rim to rim, and this is where it started and ended.

Speaker 1 (01:16:12)
I got done the first day, and I suffered, but they were doing Havasupai the next day. If you know about Havasupai, it's one of the most beautiful places in the world. Same thing. It's at least a marathon-level effort to run down into Havasupai and back out. They were going to do that the the next day, my dad and his friends that I was with. And they were like, Okay, you've had enough, right? And I was like, No, I'm going to have a supi. So I ended up running 50 miles in two days, basically back-to-back marathons as a nine-year-old.Un Unbelievable. That was it. At that point, the riding was on the wall, right? I was going to do Mount Tippinogas, and I was going to do these other things, and it wasn't going to be a problem. And so he essentially lost a bet with me, was forced to let me run. And it's not like I was doing all this specific training or anything, but I had done things that were harder than the race. Had no expectations. It was just like, I go out and have fun, 3 hours, 8 minutes, 5 seconds. This is seven minutes a mile.For.

Speaker 2 (01:17:10)
A marathon.

Speaker 1 (01:17:11)
Yeah, for a marathon. State record.9 year old.I turned 10 right before the race. So I was 10 on race day. And of course, the next couple of years, I ran faster and I'm about the same speed as the elite Olympic trials qualifying woman. And they don't like that. That's an ego blow when a 4-foot-tall, sawed-off run with red hair goes by. Lots of swear words. I learned a lot of new vocabulary at that point in time.

Speaker 2 (01:17:40)
It sounds super fun.

Speaker 1 (01:17:42)
It really was, and it still is for me. I think that's one of the biggest pieces of advice I give to people is make it fun. I live in a place now in Golden, Colorado. I've got about 20 trailheads within a 15-minute drive. And for me, any day I want to go, it's just like, what sounds fun today? What do I want to do? Do I want to go get my hands dirty and scramble off a cliffside? Or do I want to climb up a mountain and bomb down this trail? Or do I want to go through the deep dark enchanted forest in the snow? Who knows? I think that's a big piece of things. You hit it on the head. It should be fun.

Speaker 2 (01:18:16)
Is it as much fun for you as it's always been?I.

Speaker 1 (01:18:19)
Think it might even be more fun.That's great. I don't know. I'll tell you this. I'm on break right now. There's this book Train Hard, Win Easy by Tobi Tanzer. He went and lived with the Kenyans, right? And he writes in the book I think that a lot of these world champions don't run three months of the year. They just totally take it off. No workouts at all. And when I read that, I was like, Well, I should do that. If the best in the world are doing that, I should try that. I think that has been one thing that has always kept it fun for me is I've always taken two, three months off. I don't run. I do other stuff. It's winter right now. I snowboard, I snow shoe, I play basketball, I do pickleball, you name it. It shouldn't be rote and routine and boring. If that's the the way it's happening, find something else to do.
