[00:00:05.440] - Speaker 1
Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. Tétragrammaton. The deeper I got, I started working harder and more hours because I kept feeling like, if I don't keep going, if I lose momentum, I'll never finish. If you know the book, it goes out into a lot of different subjects and areas, and I always felt behind. So it got to be seven days a week. I was literally working about an average of 8 to 12 hours a day. I mean, I wouldn't eat dinner till 9:00. If I ate dinner, I couldn't work after dinner. So I tried to put it off till 9:00. I take a break. I had a dog, a neighbor's dog, that I would walk a couple of times a So I get that hour of fresh air, and then I go to the gym for an hour. But other than that, it was just constant.

[00:01:08.070] - Speaker 2
Do you think of yourself as an investigative journalist?

[00:01:11.860] - Speaker 1
Well, actually, I was doing it for a few years before this. This was my first book, and it was my first real heavy investigative piece. But I had done the story prior. I had been asked to do it. Well, actually, I pitched it to Details magazine, a story about a woman who was furiously killed. And she lived in LA, and it was a classic small town beauty queen, Michigan girl comes out here to think she's going to be a star, the next Madonna singer, actress, and she ends up getting killed and left in a Pit. It was the 50th anniversary to the week of the Black Dahlia murder, which was famously an unsolved murder of a Midwest girl. She wasn't cut in half like Elizabeth Short, but she was stabbed and left there about three or four days before her body was discovered by vagrants, and then she wasn't identified for a week. So it was this awful story. And I did spend six months on that. And I really thought that I was going to solve who had killed her. And I think I did, but details was apprehensive because the guy who I was claiming had it done was a pretty powerful club owner in Los Angeles who was also a music producer and very wealthy, and she had become a nuisance.

[00:02:31.870] - Speaker 1
The story was called The murder of Ms. Hollywood. He had created a Ms. Hollywood pageant just so she could get the title. He was 30 years older than her, and I believe that he had her killed because she had found out that... I mean, he had basically tossed her aside. She couldn't get beyond whatever recordings he'd done of her, and she was getting more and more addicted to drugs. So she ended up becoming homeless, but she had information about his dealings the mob, and she was going to report him. And she got threatened in LA and went to Oxnard. And then she went up to that small town near Sacramento where she was killed. And she told a couple of people she had contact there that he was trying to kill her, and she was going to end up dead. So that was frustrating because I couldn't resolve that. And prior to that, I had done investigative pieces for Us magazine, which at the time was owned by Rolling Stone. I was doing 5,000-word pieces about the entertainment industry, and I did about a half dozen of those. I hadn't ever set out to be a journalist, number one, investigative reporter, number two.

[00:03:40.310] - Speaker 1
But I found my way into investigative reporting after doing celebrity profile tells and set stories for about five or six years that I got real bored of. And the investigation was fun because you're trying to find out new information that people don't want found out. So that led to my albatross around my neck, which was It was a mansion case, and that was, again, 20 years was too long, but I'm proud of what came out of it.

[00:04:07.270] - Speaker 2
You started the process, it was the 30th anniversary of the murders, correct?

[00:04:12.540] - Speaker 1
Yeah, '99.

[00:04:15.160] - Speaker 2
Why would we think, just hypothetically, that we could find new information on something that happened 30 years ago that wasn't available 30 years before?

[00:04:25.020] - Speaker 1
To be fair to the magazine, my assignment wasn't to find new information. My editor Her daughter called me and she said, I have a perfect story for you. It's the 30th anniversary of the Manson murders, August '99, and she called me in March '99. I want you to do a long piece, how it impacted Hollywood, how it changed Hollywood. The victims really blended back then with the movie community and the music community unlike they had before. I told her, I had never even read Helter Skelter, and I said, I'm not at all interested in that. She said, Well, you'll be interested once you start. I said, I don't know, Leslie. She goes, You'll find something more interesting to you than the impact if that's what you have to do. But it wasn't their idea for me to do any new revelations about the case.

[00:05:16.100] - Speaker 2
Based on their original ask, how did it change Hollywood?

[00:05:19.610] - Speaker 1
Well, it did. I mean, really overnight, Joan Deedin famously said that the morning she woke up and heard about the murders, she knew the '60s had come to an end. I mean, things were getting out of hand with the drugs. Not that drugs were bad, but because of drugs, people were letting their guard down. Famously, the Tate house on Cielo Drive, Polansky house, was an open-door policy. Anybody could come in and out. So once the murders happened, people, since Poliosi writes about it in his book, and that's one thing that he didn't exaggerate, got guard dogs, guns, put up walls, security, became much more careful. And also, since they weren't solved for about three months, people were paranoid and suspecting each other, including Roman Polansky, who famously was stalking John Phillips because he thought John Phillips might have had something to do with it. Really? I didn't know that. Roman had had an affair with Michelle, and John was very jealous, even though he wasn't even with her at that point. They had broken up a year or so before, and Roman had other reasons to believe that Phillips was behind it. He actually broke into his garage.Wow.Yeah. That's wild.

[00:06:29.040] - Speaker 1
It's crazy. Yeah. I was trying to interview John Phillips forever until he died. He wouldn't talk to me. I did have a off-the-record lunch with Michelle Phillips one day. That was pretty cool. And interviewed Denny Daherty. And the Mama Cass, there's a lot of reporting that she was close to the manson family and had them to her house. I've never been able to confirm it. It's all speculative. And I talked to lots of people in her family, I mean, her daughter and her sister and Russ Kunkel and those people. And the daughter was too young to know, but they all thought they would have heard. You know Jimmy Webb? He published a memoir about two or three years ago, where a big revelation in this book that he was recording with Cass in London right before she died, and she confided to him that she had arrived at the Tate house the night of the murders and seeing bodies on the property and got in her car and sped home. I tried to get Jimmy Webb to... He stood behind it, but he wouldn't talk to me about it. He wouldn't comment on it. And that was, I think, after my book came out or shortly before.

[00:07:42.980] - Speaker 1
So I had done my cast reporting 10 or 12 years before. But I went back to her closest friends, her daughter, her sister, and said, Is there any chance she told you this story? And all of them said no, and she would have told us before Jimmy Webb. So is it true? I don't know. Was She's obviously doing it to sell a book? I mean, actually, without going into the weeds, there's a good chance she would have gone to the house that night. And I did believe that she had these massive secrets about the case and these drug dealers she knew who actually were the first suspects. But that will hopefully be in the second book if I get enough substantiation.

[00:08:21.790] - Speaker 2
How much have you learned since the book came out?

[00:08:24.010] - Speaker 1
A lot more. I mean, when I finished it, I honestly thought, 20 years. Yeah, that's it. I'm going to write fairy tales about unicorns and princesses and children's books. But there was so much in the book that wasn't answered, which was really frustrating. Another reason it took so long, kept trying to get the conclusion, the definitive answers. After it came out, I kept going back to it, but I thought it was more like a hobby. I did Joe Rogan's podcast about six or seven months after it came out, and that changed everything for the book because he opened it up to a much wider audience than it had gotten. And once that happened, and prior to it a little bit, I would get contacted. I still get contacted almost every day by people with information.

[00:09:12.410] - Speaker 2
Based on reading the book and-Based on the book, yeah. They have information that you didn't have in the book?

[00:09:17.090] - Speaker 1
Yeah. So 95% of them are insane. 5% of them are great. And there are about a half dozen people that I've been communicating with for five years now. The book came out in 2019. One or two of them on a weekly basis, and they have access to information that I never had access to, didn't know how to get. One of them is an ex-military person, intelligence. Others are ex-district attorneys, cops, people in law enforcement. I've been accumulating information, supporting my original thesis and trying to make them not so much thesis, but factual story. I still haven't committed to doing part two with my publisher, they want it, and I want to do it, but I have to thought a couple more.

[00:10:05.620] - Speaker 2
Of the material, yeah. When people reach out, do they just want to see the truth be told? Yeah.

[00:10:12.070] - Speaker 1
Some of them, I think, there were so many people who wouldn't talk to me in the course of reporting the book, not just from the celebrity entertainment world, but from intelligence and cops. But some of them, I think when they read the book without patting my own backs, I had a respect for my doggedness and for the fact that I really, in the book, don't sensationalize what I found. I present it pretty soberly, objectively, except I'm writing in the first person. But I don't have anything definitive that I can't absolutely prove. I think that's one of the reasons people who otherwise might not have reached out to me have reached out to me. I'm still waiting for more, and it's surprising. I open every email, read every email because you just never know. And it's surprising that every now and then I get somebody that's got really great stuff.

[00:11:02.980] - Speaker 2
Tell me the order that you went in. How did you start the process originally?

[00:11:08.040] - Speaker 1
Well, the first thing I did was read Helter Skelter and reach out to-When you read Helter Skelter, did you read it thinking, This is the story, or did you read it with a question mark? I read it not thinking I was going to find out anything new in it, but I thought I needed to familiarize myself with it. And I was actually blown away by what a fast, exciting read it is. It's really well done.

[00:11:35.730] - Speaker 2
Did you think of it as the accepted story?

[00:11:40.220] - Speaker 1
Oh, yeah. And I accepted it. And when I reached out to Vince Buliosi, he hadn't done interviews for a number of years. He would do them periodically, like on anniversaries and stuff. Maybe that's why he agreed to meet with me. But when he agreed to, he was the second interview I did, and I went to house in Pasadena and spent about six hours with him.

[00:12:04.540] - Speaker 2
Do you like him that first meeting?

[00:12:05.850] - Speaker 1
I liked him because he was so generous with his time. I went into his house and his wife, Gail, put out cookies and coffee, and we sat in the house and talked for an hour or two. Then we went out to lunch. Then he gave me a tour of some of the sites connected to the crimes. Then we went back to his house and talked more. And as much as I liked him, I'd done my research. I read the I read a lot of the interviews he'd done. I knew he was just on autopilot, just regurgitating every story he'd ever told. And I think that maybe it was because he hadn't done it for a while that he was extra garriless. But at one point, it's in the book, I said, Vince, thank you so much. You're giving me great quotes and stuff, but I really am hoping to write something to do some new reporting about this 30-year-old case. Is there anything that hasn't been told about it before? We can go off the record, not for attribution, turn off the recorder. He said, Turn the recorder off, turn the recorder off. Then he told me this story.

[00:13:09.680] - Speaker 1
That was pretty shocking. I wasn't allowed to use it. I couldn't use it and attribute it to him. Which was our agreement until seven or eight years later when he brought it up in an on the record interview with me when our relationship had become very contentious, and he was trying to stop my book. And he talked about and admitted he had told me that so then I could use it. And that was what split the narrative open for me. I mean, a few days after the murders, the police were searching the house at Cielo, and they took these videotapes from the loft above the living room. And they looked at them. And in Vincent's book, he writes that it was just a homemade video by Roman, who did have cameras and video equipment. It did exist then. And it was of Roman and Sharon making love. So he put the camera on. And that's what was in the book. He told me that in reality, it was Roman forcing Sharon to have sex with two men against her will, like a rape. And I was naive about criminal investigative reporting. Right then, I should have said, the first suspect in a crime when a husband or wife is killed is always a spouse.

[00:14:27.880] - Speaker 1
Now, Roman did have a troubled relationship with her that the police knew about, but that's much more extreme to know that he was forcing her to have sex against her will with two men. He never told me who they were. I didn't say to him, Well, that changes a lot. And I didn't ask him why he didn't put that in. I figured he did it to protect... He did. He said he did it to protect her memory. But he also made another mistake, which, again, I'm admitting my naivety and stupidity. He also told me he was the one who told the cops to put it back in the loft. And this is part of the official narrative. Roman did go to the house about three or four days after the murders. He flew back from London went into the house, gave the police a tour. It was photographed and featured in Life magazine. They had put the video back for him to take, and they never told him they had looked at it. Well, Vince couldn't have told them, as he told me to put it back because he wasn't on the case till November.

[00:15:34.070] - Speaker 1
This was August. So was he lying about who knew what he was lying about? But it took me a couple of years to go, wait a minute. He says in his book, middle of the book, he said he had never thought about the case beyond the fact that it was an unsolved murder. He had nothing to do with it until he was asked to be the co-prosecutor about a week before Thanksgiving in November. So that changed everything. At that point, I couldn't ask him about that discrepancy because he wasn't talking to me anymore. But early on, and that was again, the first couple of weeks of reporting, when he told me that, I thought, well, if he changed this, what else did he change and why? And that's when I started probing and trying to get interviews with people who had never talked before, witnesses, cops. And I think the passage of time, people who turned down interview request to the media at the time, authors for years. They get old, they get lonely, they get bored. If you're persistent, they start talking. I started scoring interviews with people who had never told their story before, and then that started opening stuff up and making it a whole different story.

[00:16:49.040] - Speaker 2
Do you remember the first point in doing the research where you felt like there's more here? In the example you just gave me, you didn't realize it until years later. But But where was the first time there's something here? Something is not adding up. There's more to learn.

[00:17:06.010] - Speaker 1
I got access to a guy named Rudy Altebelli. Rudy owned the house that Sherrod and Roman were renting from him, the Cielo Drive house. He had lived there, I think, since about '61 or '62. He lived in the guest house on the property. He'd rent the main house before Roman and Sherrod.

[00:17:24.100] - Speaker 2
So even Terry Melcher rented it. It was not Terry because it's always referred to as Terry Melcher's house.

[00:17:30.210] - Speaker 1
Yeah, no. Terry and Candice rented it, and Candice wanted to buy it with Terry. She loved it. She called it the Love house. In the middle of the night, in January of '68, Terry said, We're leaving. And to this day, Candice Bergen has never explained this. She wouldn't talk to me, but he still had very many months left in his lease. They were going to renew the lease. Something spoked him, and he left in the middle of the night. At that point, Rudy rented it to Roman and Sharon, who moved in in March. Rudy had never talked to a reporter before. And he was a key prosecution witness for Vince Polioci. And he was a real colorful character. He was an agent for back in the '40s and '50s, people like Cary Grant. He had this stable of clients that were very eclectic, Jack Nicholson, Jimmy Darren, Dick Van Dyke. But after the murder, orders, he, like a lot of people connected to the victims, lost everything. I mean, he had already been doing lots of drugs and drinking. He was an out gay man before men were out in Hollywood. He came from Brooklyn after serving in World War II, where he was raised and lived in the same building as Elizabeth Short in Hollywood on Cherokee, knew her casually, and was just very flamboyant.

[00:18:57.170] - Speaker 1
And he was the one who testified about Mancing making this visit to the house in March, looking for Terry. Well, once he agreed to start meeting with me, I had to take him out to restaurants. We started at Mousseau & Franks. That was his favorite restaurant. And then we'd move around Hollywood to fancy expensive restaurants. And I had an expense account at Premiere magazine. So it was okay, but the nights were long. He'd drink a lot. I drank too much. And he would always leave me Give me a little information, but leave unanswered questions. So he started telling me stuff about Terry, Melcher, and his relationship with manson. And Rudy was, to the day he died, bitter that every Everybody painted a picture of him as being the one who... He rejected manson when Manson came to the house. And according to the official narrative, that's why Manson targeted. He didn't know who was there anymore, but he wanted to send a message. And that story wasn't true. He admitted that to me. He admitted to me that Melcher was much more involved with the family. Historically, in the official narrative, at trial, Melcher said he'd met manson, I think, three times, once at Dennis Wilson's house, and then twice at the spawn Ranch when he went out to audition manson in the spring before the summer murders.

[00:20:29.750] - Speaker 1
And And he was asked to understand. And he testified at the Grand Jury, at the Tate La Bianca trial, at the Tex Watson trial, and at the retrial of Leslie Van Houten. And he always stuck to the story. I found out that he had lied. He had perjured himself. And Vince had known that and subborn that perjury. So that information came to me about two or three months in.

[00:20:53.000] - Speaker 2
Do you think that he and Vince were in cajoots?

[00:20:56.610] - Speaker 1
Rudy or Terry? Terry. Oh, absolutely. I I caught them in lies because they were each-So they had the same story, but that story was a lie? Yeah, it was changed, scripted. I think a lot of the witness testimony was, including Rudy Outabeli.

[00:21:12.510] - Speaker 2
How do you think that happened? I know you can't know, but just based on what you do know, how would you guess it may have happened?

[00:21:20.200] - Speaker 1
That's the frustration of the book, is I have a couple of theories that I couldn't prove because number one, Vince wouldn't admit to any of it, and Terry wouldn't admit to any of it. Terry got so upset that I was going to report it, that my one big encounter with him face to face on the roof of his building on Ocean Drive or whatever in Santa Monica, he said to me, If you don't publish all this, if you don't write all this, this is after threatening me, saying, I have an army of attorneys. I will shut you down. Everything that Vince did to me a few years later, he said, How about this? People have been begging me to write my memoir for years, not just about my experiences producing the birds and being such close acquaintances with Sly Stone and the Beach Boys, et cetera, but also about my mother's life, which would shock you. Stories about my mother that nobody knows. There's mother's stories today.

[00:22:16.450] - Speaker 2
Who was the biggest star in the world at one period of time. Yeah.

[00:22:19.810] - Speaker 1
I'm like, You're going to throw your mother on it to the bus to save yourself? Then I knew it was even more that I still wasn't getting the whole story.

[00:22:27.250] - Speaker 2
What was he? I've never met him. What was he like? I don't know anything about him, really.

[00:22:31.550] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Well, he was a boy wonder. He was producing. Obviously, he was what they call a nepo kid now. He got the door open for him because he was Doris Day's son. But he was really good at what he did. He knew how to make hits. And by the time he was 22, 23, he had a huge contract, was producing singles. When I met him, he had stopped working for a number of years. He had a lot of drug and alcohol issues himself. When I started the story, he gone up to Carmel, where his mother lived and ran a hotel. It was basically just a charity for her to support her animal protection things.

[00:23:08.780] - Speaker 2
Do we know why he left the music business?

[00:23:11.630] - Speaker 1
That's a good question. I'm trying to remember When he did, he wrote Cocomo, which was the biggest Beach Boys single ever. I think it's one of the worst songs.

[00:23:21.750] - Speaker 2
With Papa John, no?

[00:23:23.290] - Speaker 1
Yeah. John Phillips and him. I don't know Brian Wilson. I can't remember. Or maybe it was just the two of them. I think it was just the two of them. Yeah. Yeah. So I think that was in the '90s. He might have even done it from Carmel. I don't know if he was burnt out or what. Nobody's ever written a book just on him. I mean, maybe it's time for that. But he had come back because he decided to get back into the business with Lou Adler, and they were going to start a label or start recording together. And he only agreed to talk to me because he knew that Rudy was talking to me, and he was really worried. And he had told Rudy on the phone after I first reached out Terry to try to get an interview on the phone. Right after he talked to me, he called up Rudy and he said, Vince, promise me that was never going to come out. And when I met him, the one time face to face on his roof for about an hour and a half or so. He was drunk. It was about one in the afternoon.

[00:24:18.960] - Speaker 1
It was the day before the fourth of July. My immediate reaction was he looked like Jim Morrison in his latter days. His face was really puffy. He had sunglasses on, long hair, and he was slurrying and slightly incoherent and talking. And I have the tape. It's an hour long tape, and it's hard to listen to.

[00:24:41.410] - Speaker 2
Was it sad in the moment?

[00:24:42.810] - Speaker 1
Yeah, it was really sad. I knew that he'd had a sad life. I mean, his mother, actually, she was America's sweetheart, but she was not a nice person. And she didn't go to his funeral. And he had one child, a son. And when Doris died, he didn't go to her funeral. She had cut him off. So who knows what was really going on within that family. He'd been married. I think he had a third wife when I interviewed him. And he He had less than a couple of years later. He had skin cancer that I think I read somewhere. It was from all the time he spent in Malibu on the beach in the sun. So he wasn't that old. I think he was mid to late '60s when he died. It was frustrating because you want people to spill their goods and tell you the truth. And I knew I was getting to him, but it was so clear. Like he said to me after saying he was going to hire all these lawyers and sue me for defamation, then he asked me to write his memoir. I'm like, you just threatened to ruin me.

[00:25:50.070] - Speaker 1
And now you're asking me to be your official biographer. And trust me with stories about your mother and your career in the rock and roll business that have never been told. It was insane. But that was par for the course with this. I mean, almost I would have those kinds of interviews once a week. I mean, I became so much more cynical about the world. And I was 40. The day I got the assignment was the day after my 40th birthday. And I thought I was the most sophisticated, all-knowing for it because I lived in New York for years and years, and I'd been reporting on entertainment. But, boy, I was naive about how the legal world law enforcement work. I mean, I knew there I knew there were bad cops. I didn't know how many bad cops. I knew there were bad prosecutors. I didn't know, wow, how many. How you really can't trust almost everything you're told. So I became much more skeptical. And I was romantic about 1967, '68, the free love and the hippie movement. I bought the story about love beads and long hair and happy drugs.

[00:26:57.080] - Speaker 2
Was there any part of it that was real, or was the whole thing a sci-op?

[00:27:01.030] - Speaker 1
I wonder. I still don't know whether the CIA... I know the CIA was behind experimenting with LSD in the United States before anybody else got access to it. But did they do what people think they did in the hate and distribute it? I'm not sure.

[00:27:18.980] - Speaker 2
When did they come into your story? Oh, gosh. In your research, when was the first clue? It's like, There's something bigger going on here.

[00:27:26.400] - Speaker 1
So, Vince, in his book, has one little paragraph graph in the epilog of the book, Helder Skelter, where he's wrapping everything up. And there was an update that he had written 10 years after, I think. And in the epilog, he says, even though he was able to convict everyone and show that they killed the people that he believed they killed, he said, The one thing I will never know, and that we might never know, is how manson was able to get these kids. Mostly, 90 % of them had no criminal records. Most of them were under the age of 23, 24. Most of them were women. In under a year, to be able to control them to the point where they would go out and kill strangers for no reason, just because they were told to, and have no remorse and even laugh about them after. And he says, Is there some hidden switch, some secret? Did he learn this on his own in prison, or was he taught by others? And that was one thing I highlighted the first time I read the book. And he said, We might never know. And at the point that I found out that there was this And in Helter Skelder, Vince Hotley talks about Vincent's first year out of prison in '67 in The Hate.

[00:28:51.300] - Speaker 1
When he became, he transformed from this uninteresting, lifetime conman who had been in and out of federal institutions half of his life into this guru with this beautiful women, not all beautiful, but some of them following him, not speaking unless he spoke to them first, doing whatever he said all in under a year. He created that monster or guru or whatever. And when I found out there was so much stuff that we didn't know about that year, I went up to the hate and started exploring who we had contact with. I found out about the free medical clinic. And I had never heard of MK Ultra, which I think you must know about the secret mind control program by the CIA. This was really in the early days of the Internet. It was 2000, I think. So I would Google, and there wasn't nearly as much information out there. And I started hearing about this program. And then I interviewed someone who I just, when I was waiting for you to come in, I was looking at Twitter and Alex Jones just tweeted about him today, a guy named Ted Gunnison, who was a former FBI agent who left the agency in the, I think, late '80s and started lecturing and writing and saying there was this secret cabal of child predators and really, really crazy stuff.

[00:30:19.320] - Speaker 1
Now, I knew that he had worked peripherfully on the manson case, and that's why I interviewed him. While I was talking to him, the one or two times I met with him in 2000, He brought up MK Alter and told me a little bit. This is Ted Gunnison. Ted Gunnison. Yeah, a little bit more about it than I knew. And he said, you should look into a psychiatrist named Louis Jollyan West. And I said, I actually interviewed him about five years ago. I'd lived in New York, and the magazine would send me out here. And it was one of the investigative pieces I did. It was on the phenomenon of celebrity stalking. So Madonna had just had her house broken into by a guy who wanted to kill her. It was a famous story. Rebecca Schafer had been murdered, a TV actress a year or two before. So I came out from New York and spent a couple of weeks interviewing a few actresses who had been stalked. And authorities, cops, people who dealt with that world. And one of the people I reached out to was this professor at UCLA named West, because he was an expert on the criminal mind.

[00:31:25.270] - Speaker 1
And he was a neuroscience, the director of their neuroscience At UCLA. At UCLA and the head of psychiatry. And it was a bad interview. I got there on time, and he was about 45 minutes late. I was waiting in his office. He came in, didn't apologize. What do you want to know? So I said, well, before I could even ask a question, he started lecturing me about the subject as if I was in a class at UCLA. I tried to stop him to ask a question. He wouldn't let me. And then we're done. And he told me, all right, we're done. I said, I haven't really gotten to ask any questions. Describe him.

[00:31:59.330] - Speaker 2
What did he look like?

[00:32:00.820] - Speaker 1
A large guy. He had a beard. He was probably a 92 or something. So he was probably about early '70s. Or he died the year I got the assignment. His son later wrote a book about it. His son did assisted suicide with both his father and his mother. A year or two apart, both of them had terminal diseases, and his son gave them drugs and then wrote about it.

[00:32:27.170] - Speaker 2
Are the books about that or about their lives?

[00:32:30.840] - Speaker 1
The son's book is really about his making the decision first to do it with his mother and then to do it with his father. But there's a lot of biographical information in there. And I had tried reaching out to all three of Jolly's kids. I mean, five years into this, I got close to getting one of the daughters to meet with me, but she changed her mind. I talked to John, the son, who basically said, We are not allowed to talk about my father's career, even though he's not alive, and I can't talk to you. I'm sorry. He died, I think, the year my book came out. And to this day, I haven't been able to find out how he died. I mean, he wouldn't have been more than 60, as mysterious as his father. Jolly did a lot of press over the years, a lot of interviews and stuff. So there wasn't anything stunning in his book, except the fact that nobody knew that he had done this.

[00:33:28.190] - Speaker 2
How do we know about Jolly's His relationship to the CIA?

[00:33:31.100] - Speaker 1
So Ted Gunderson told me to look into him at that meeting, and I told him, I said, Wow, I interviewed him about the stalking phenomenon. I'll go back and listen to his interview because I never even listened to it. And I had the tape transcribed They still had... There was nothing interesting in there. I looked him up and found out he had died, I think, within months of me learning about him. What I was starting to do then was, even though I was getting these exclusive interviews with people who had never talked, they're telling you stuff, and it's 30 years later. The memory plays tricks. People also want to make themselves more important in stories. I realized I'm getting nuggets of important information, but I need to corroborate it. And that's when I started really chasing down documentary, original police reports, case files. So with Jolly, I found out that he had been at the Haight-ashbury Free Medical Clinic the same summer that manson was going there on a weekly basis, first to get medical care for the women who had sexually transmitted him, who had sexually transmitted diseases, and also for drug issues. And then his parole officer was doing drug research there.

[00:34:43.210] - Speaker 1
He started having his parole meetings there. Well, Jolly had an office there at the same time. I called up UCLA, and he had been there. He had been at University of Oklahoma before UCLA, but he had gone to UCLA, coincidentally, in '69, the year the murders happened. He'd been there until he retired. So I knew that they were most likely the repository of his papers. So I contacted them and they said, I think they had 160 boxes, but none of them had been processed. And I said, Well, I have a magazine deadline, and it's due in a couple months, which is true back then. And I don't know, I guess Charlotte, the woman in charge of Special Collections, took a liking to me. And she said, All right, I'll assign some grad students and we'll start releasing them, but just a couple at a time. So I started looking in his boxes. It took me months. I go to that young library every day, go down there, and just I was looking for a needle in the haystack because I just felt like there were too many coincidences.

[00:35:45.270] - Speaker 2
What were the things that were in the papers?

[00:35:46.960] - Speaker 1
Well, West had been accused from the very first report of the existence of MK Alter in '75, '76. He had been accused on the front page of the New York Times as being one of seven or eight university professors who had been contracted by the CIA to perform mind control experiments on subjects without their knowledge.

[00:36:10.910] - Speaker 2
Without the subject's knowledge.

[00:36:12.320] - Speaker 1
Yeah, without consent and without the university's College. In the case of West, also the Air Force base where he was before he went to Oklahoma. And West denied it. And West said he had been approached by Sydney Gottlieb, who was the founder of MKR Ultra at the CIA, and he ran it from '52 to '72.

[00:36:30.510] - Speaker 2
What was Sydney Gottlieb's job?

[00:36:32.450] - Speaker 1
He was a head of technical services. He was a chemist. So he, with Allan Dulles, who was a director, and Richard Helms, who was an assistant director, they created MK Ultra in '52, '53.

[00:36:44.120] - Speaker 2
Did you get to meet any of those guys?

[00:36:46.180] - Speaker 1
Richard Holmes was still alive, wouldn't talk to me. Sydney Gottlieb was alive for about a year, but he lived on a commune in India, and I couldn't get information for him. That's interesting. Dulles was long dead. Yeah, it's a lot interesting about Gottlieb. What do you know about him? Well, there was a book that came out after mine called Poisoner in Chief by a New York Times reporter, Biography of Gottlieb. I don't think he has anything that wasn't already available in the public. There's not a lot of books about MK Altra, but The very first one is called The Search for the Manchurian Candidate. It's by John Marks, who was a State Department employee, like a clerical guy, who came across these financial files in a warehouse off-site of the State Department, and he saw they were all funding, at the time, Oklahoma, where Jolly West was. That's interesting. And these other places to do this research. It was very vague. It was just financial records, not what was done. He brought that to a congressman. One of the congressmen called up is Seymour Hirsch. And Seymour Hirsch was the one who reported it for the first time.

[00:37:52.970] - Speaker 1
There were congressional hearings. West was-So was he a whistleblower?

[00:37:57.250] - Speaker 2
Would you call him a whistleblower?

[00:37:58.370] - Speaker 1
John Marks? Yeah. Oh, absolutely. Absolutely. Yeah, and he wrote this authoritative book, The First and Best.

[00:38:04.450] - Speaker 2
Explain what a mentoring candidate is. Okay. Do you know where the name comes from?

[00:38:07.950] - Speaker 1
Yeah, the name comes from a book, a novel by Richard Condon, who is believed to have been part of the agency in some capacity. He wrote it in the early '60s. It was about a program, a hypothetical program run by the United States government to create people who would use the The brainwashing skills that we knew the Chinese and the North Koreans and the Russians had developed that we started developing, too, in the '50s. But the ultimate goal of each of these foreign countries, including our own, was to create a programmed assassin. He might have invented Menchurian candidate, Menchurian China, who was played in the first movie, the Menchurian candidate by-Frank Sinatra. Yeah, I think it was Frank Sinatra. Lawrence Harvey, who would kill when triggered, in that case, I think a playing card, a Queen of Heart or something. Angela Lansbury was the mother. So that movie came out right before John F. Kennedy was assassinated, and they pulled it from the theaters. But he's the one who created it, but nothing was written about MK Alter. Nobody knew it existed. He didn't call it that until John Marks blew the whistle, brought it to Congress.

[00:39:24.720] - Speaker 1
They had three hearings, Frank Church hearings, beginning in '75 for two years. They exposed the existence of this program that had been the most highly funded of all the CIA's programs to that date, from 1952 to 1972, 73. Upon closing it, Richard Helms, who by then was the director of the CIA, and Sidney Gottlieb, destroyed all 20 years of records. And had it not been for Mark stumbling upon these files in '75, no one would have known about it.

[00:39:54.220] - Speaker 2
Why do you think they destroyed the records?

[00:39:55.970] - Speaker 1
Oh, because there were crimes. I mean, number one, the CIA is by charter. They're not allowed to do anything on American soil domestically. They were doing experiments on prisoners, on people at Air Force bases, on people in brothels in San Francisco and New York who were loured into these apartments that had one-way mirrors where CIA scientists would study them as they were dosed with LSD by prostitutes who have been hired by the CIA. It was called Operation Midnight Climax. So it was illegal. People had who knows what damages were done. And West, on the front page of the time, said, Sydney Gottlieve had approached me about using LSD on human beings as a part of this. And I said, number one, LSD When people are in LSD, you can't control them to do anything. And I would never administer it to anyone but animals. I only do animal experiments. They were all lies. And from then, '75, '76, '7, West had never been challenged. They gave him the benefit of the doubt. He wasn't investigated. People like at UCLA, at the school newspaper, would ask him about it or write about it, and he would go ballistic, denying and threatened to sue them.

[00:41:12.370] - Speaker 1
I have about six or seven articles that appeared over every two or three years until he died, where it would come up and West would threaten to sue if they published that it wasn't true, he said. So I went in there with nobody ever being able to prove he had anything to do with this. And I found the needle in the haystack, and it was letters. At that point, he's dead. So I'm going through the boxes, and I think it was about three months in, and I was just miserable because there was nothing in the index or finding guys. I'm getting two or three boxes every three or four days.

[00:41:45.480] - Speaker 2
And then I found-You don't know what you're looking for, right?

[00:41:48.170] - Speaker 1
I was looking for evidence of him and mansum being somehow together or him and MK Ultra. I see. So I found these letters, and the first one was about 10 pages, and it was from him to Sherman Griffard. Who's that? That was Sydney Gottlieb's alias. Now, I had heard the name Sherman Griffard because it's in John Marx's book from '77, The Man, Sure, and Canada. They had already gone through it. And I go, these letters sound like a blueprint for MK Ultra. Unredacted, they're describing the experiments they're going to do at that point at Lackland Air Force Base. And he said he's going to try to create fugue states. He's going to try to create amnesias. He's going to try to induce insanity. And his ultimate goal was, he said, to replace true memories with false memories without a person's knowledge. And I said, but who's Sherman Griffith? And I went back and I got Marx's book. There were three books about MK Ultra at that point in print, 2000 or whatever it was, 2001. And in the footnotes of Marx's book, it says Sherman Griffith was an alias, Sydney Gottlieb to correspond. So then I knew and I went back and then I found about eight different letters from '52, '53 till about '56, '57.

[00:43:11.030] - Speaker 1
The last one was a report where he said he had successfully developed the technology to remove true memories and replace them with false memories using a combination of hypnosis and drugs without a person's knowledge. I mean, that was what the CIA needed to do from the first place. They wanted to program people to kill and then have that memory removed, that thing. So I was the first one to be able to say, all right, this guy was lying all these years. That was a eureka moment for me. And to this day, I was so close to giving up. They kept giving in, and I found it. And they're still there at UCLA, because since my book has come out, researchers go there all the time now. And I said, they should just put them out on display so you guys don't have to find them. But I tell them exactly where they are. Because West did not intend for those to remain. He probably had graduate students organizing and stuff before he died, and he probably didn't look closely. It was careless. But that was what enabled me then to take that leap into, was Manson taught this, or did Manson somehow benefit from his knowledge?

[00:44:22.250] - Speaker 1
Then I was trying to find out whether Manson and West-How do we know that he's not doing this as a cookey professor, but in fact, doing it for the US government? Oh, because in the letters, in the letters, he discusses with Gottlieb how he's going to hide the funding from the CIA, from Gottlieb, from his own superiors. When he was at Lackland, six months into his research, he tells Gottlieb he has to fire the commander at Lackland because he's become too inquisitive about his experiments. And they removed the guy. That guy went on to become the Secretary of the Air Force, I think. Very well known guy. After they moved him to another base, he never knew why. I called him to say, Do you know why you were removed from Lackland in 1953 or 1954? He said, Yeah, it was just a transfer. I go, I have something to show you. He said, I don't want to see it. I don't want to know about it. He wouldn't talk to me. Wow. Yeah. So Gottlieb told West to have double envelopes, use his alias. He had a post office box, a fake corporation in DC called Chernobyl Associates.

[00:45:29.640] - Speaker 1
It was very, very complicated about how they withheld this. West even wrote in the subsequent letter, he said, Since much of my experiments are on people who are in our mental facilities, psychiatric wards, their strange behavior won't strike other doctors or observers as unusual, which gives me more freedom because they'll just think it's a symptom of their mental illness. But this was the most important sentence. He goes, But you know, eventually we need to take these experiments and put them to practical use in the field, meaning a wave in the public. Wow. So that was when things shifted, and I really started looking at what Vince had inadvertently sent me on when he said, Will we ever know how manson... Now, it's not a spoiler for the book because if you read a review of it, I was never able to prove that manson and West were in the same room. I know they were in the same building, and every Every doctor who I interviewed there, beginning with the main head of the Haight-ashbury Free Medical Clinic, David Smith, said, Oh, yeah, Jolly would have seen him. We all knew manson. He was a character here.

[00:46:41.700] - Speaker 1
Jolly had an associate at Oklahoma, another psychiatrist who he brought with him to the hate for that summer.

[00:46:46.660] - Speaker 2
When you say they were in the same building, let's describe. How big is this building?

[00:46:50.530] - Speaker 1
It's a classic Victorian townhouse house in the hate. It was like three stories, and they had offices. The waiting room would fill with hippies who were really... Most of them are having bad trips. But what David Smith didn't tell us, he created this in '67, anticipating what was about to happen in the Summer of Love, that there would be this invasion of kids, and they'd be using this new drug LSD, and there be no medical facility. So he did it. And again, I'm very conflicted about what I believe David knew or didn't know. He's still alive. He's in my book. I interviewed him quite a bit. He contradicted himself quite a bit.

[00:47:33.460] - Speaker 2
And when you say they were in the same building, just to be clear, Jolly had an office in this building, and Manson came there three times a week for a long time.

[00:47:42.600] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Well, the summer through the fall, In a building the size of a house.

[00:47:46.710] - Speaker 2
Yeah. Just to be clear, we can say they were both in the same building one time, and it's the Empire State Building.

[00:47:54.060] - Speaker 1
No, no. Yeah, this is a house.

[00:47:55.260] - Speaker 2
This is a house-size building, and they're there often at the At the same time.

[00:48:00.170] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Okay. James Allen, who was a psychiatrist at Oklahoma, who West brought with him, told me. He said, Of course, Jolly. We talked to him. Everyone was fascinated because Manson would walk down the hall, and it began with two or three, then it became six or seven women trailing him like slaves. And he said, There were a lot of characters in The Hate, a lot of them in The Hate, Ashto, Free Medical Clinic, but nothing like Charlie.

[00:48:26.040] - Speaker 2
What else do we know about the clinic?

[00:48:27.570] - Speaker 1
It closed the month after my book came out. It shut down. It had been open since '67. It closed in 2019.

[00:48:34.160] - Speaker 2
That's interesting. Yeah. Did the CIA join this existing thing?

[00:48:43.630] - Speaker 1
Or were they there from the beginning? Or did they start it? Or did they create it? I can't prove it. I believe they created it with David. I mean, David lied from the beginning. He said it was not going to be a research facility. He said, This is a treatment center. We're doing this to help kids. And he raised He got funding.

[00:49:01.440] - Speaker 2
What was his background?

[00:49:03.100] - Speaker 1
He was a psychiatric student who, for his thesis, I guess that was his master's thesis or his PhD, wrote a study on the effects of LSD. This is, again, where things get so confusing. In his paper, he wrote MICE. He would give MICE in communal settings, LSD starting in '65, and then crowd them and see how it affected their behavior. And what it did was it caused them not only to kill each other, but to rip each other to shreds. Wow. Yeah, I interviewed his teacher's assistant, a pre-med guy named Charles Fisher, who wrote a paper with him, and he had to go three times a day to observe the mice. And he said, I'd have to go there at 1:00 in the morning. I knew it was the Vietnam War is happening, and it was like looking at Meilai or something. You go in there and there'd be limbs.

[00:49:56.320] - Speaker 2
Do we know why this is what he was choosing to research?

[00:50:00.300] - Speaker 1
He wrote a book called Love Needs Care in 1971 or '72 about the origins of the clinic, his research. He talks about this study. He said he just anticipated that drugs would overwhelm the hate a year before it happened and that kids would live communally. Now, people were living communally in cities, but mostly be mixed.

[00:50:24.990] - Speaker 2
That's a big jump.

[00:50:25.930] - Speaker 1
Oh, yeah. It's incredible. And he talks talks about once they get crowded and clustered and they're taking drugs, and eventually, he said, speed will enter the scene, they're going to kill each other. And in one of his papers he wrote, he said he wanted to learn how they could control that behavior once people run. Theoretically, it's a good thing. Make sure kids don't hurt each other when they're tripping and using speed. Also, and this is, I think, one of my most important findings, he published it, but nobody ever thought it was remarkable. He coined something called psychedelic syndrome, which he said, some people will have one LSD experience, and it'll be profound, and then they'll go on to the next day and be just like they were before. Maybe they'll talk about it, maybe they'll try it again. Other people had life altering LSD trips their first time, where they had a massive personality change. He wanted to find out what were the precipitating factors in people kids who took LSD, who had almost a psychotic break where they never thought the same way. And he wanted to be able to divide those people, which is exactly what manson was doing.

[00:51:42.490] - Speaker 1
He was finding followers who he was giving them acid, not taking it. And then he was doing-Was that true?

[00:51:48.790] - Speaker 2
He was not taking it. He was just giving it to them?

[00:51:51.660] - Speaker 1
He might have taken in the beginning, but his commune family members in their testimony at the trials, the books they later wrote, they all said that they found out Charlie would pretend to take it and he would give it to us, and he would keep them high for consecutive days. And then he put them in role-playing stuff. It began with the men had to make love to other men, stuff that made them uncomfortable. Then it became pretend you're killing someone, all that stuff while they were high. Because some people who he recruited would rebel against them. They're like, I'm not the man, especially men, but women. I'm not going to let you tell me to have sex with someone I don't want to have sex with. I'm I'm not going to wash your feet and cook for you. But others would immediately become subservient. So basically, the objective of David's early research was to find out how to find the ones who would be the people who would be mansing girls. And when he opened the clinic in '67, there was a group called the Diggers, who were really the first hippies, and they became organized, and they were giving out free food.

[00:52:56.670] - Speaker 1
I saw that you've spoken about it before the death of the hippie funeral they had in '68, when it became a commercial term, and they buried it. Emmet Grogan, the one who founded the Diggers, wrote a book before he died. He died young, but I think he wrote it in the '70s. And he publicly said to reporters He said he thought David Smith was like a narc, like he was working for the government. And he accused David of using government funds to do research. David said after the first year, he was doing papers. He published something called the Psychedelic Journal or something, and they were studying people. But he said it was all private funding or it was volunteer work by other psychiatrists like Jolly. No, it was funded by the State Department, the NIMH, the same people that were funding money to Jolly when he was doing MKUltra stuff. So I think that David, I couldn't prove it, but I say it in the book, was complicit. I don't know if he looked the other way. So this is something, I guess, I don't care about telling it now. I don't think I've ever told it.

[00:54:01.130] - Speaker 1
I found out this recently. Someone I know has been interviewing David. And about a year and a half ago, Roger Smith died. Roger Smith, no relation to David Smith, was Manson's parole officer, who's a big character in that first year. As Manson's officer. He was almost enabling Manson to become this guru.

[00:54:19.980] - Speaker 2
And didn't he end up being his stepfather to Manson?

[00:54:22.740] - Speaker 1
Foster father. When the girls, Manson's first born child, Michael Valentine Smith from the Heinland novel, Stranger in a Strange World. Manson named him after that, named the boy after that, who he had with Mary Bruner. And in '68, Mary and three other women got arrested in Mendocino. Roger Smith, who had stopped being Manson's parole officer right about then went up to Mendocino with his wife and petitioned the court to be assigned as the foster parent to Michael. There are people who believe- That's wild. That Roger was the father of that baby and not Manson. Oh, that's interesting. I actually have never said that before, but whatever. I was going to say I never heard that one before. I couldn't put it in my book because I couldn't corroborate it, but I actually- Why would anybody think that? Well, Roger had the women to his house with me. They were coming to his house, too. I interviewed his wife. My arrangement with her was never to tell her her name, so I can talk about this. It's not in the book. She was one of my door knocks. I knocked on her door in her house in this beautiful place, and Bay Area, and she immediately shot at my face and I said, Mrs.

[00:55:35.380] - Speaker 1
So-and-so, I have these parole investigation reports for some mansion girls in '68, where you and Roger both signed your name saying they should be released. They're harmless. They're good women. Your name's on that. I'm going to put that in my book. But if you work with me and talk to me, we can have an arrangement where I don't name you. So she let me in. She was freaked out because she was terrified of Susan Atkins, the main woman. She wouldn't be in the house, and they would come over, and he said, Roger got too close to them. Roger was obsessed with Charlie. He was fascinated by Charlie.

[00:56:10.870] - Speaker 2
And what was his background?

[00:56:12.510] - Speaker 1
Roger was from Iowa. He was a rock rib Republican, as he said it. He went to Berklee criminology School, which doesn't exist anymore, to get his PhD in criminology in about '64. And for three years, he He had a master's and a PhD. He studied. His first area of focus was gangs and collective behavior with the youth in Oakland. So these kids, right before the Panthers were formed, these street kids were forming violent gangs. So he was infiltrating them with other grad students to interview them, study them, and try to figure out, again, which kids became more criminal and which kids didn't, what was the common factor in that. He wrote a paper about it for his master.

[00:57:00.940] - Speaker 2
Would that background make sense to be a parole officer? Would most parole officer-The parole officer was part-time.

[00:57:06.650] - Speaker 1
So he started being a parole officer undergrad at, I think, Madison, in Wisconsin, he went to, or University of Chicago. So he knew he wanted to get into criminology. So he got trained to be a parole officer his last couple of years there. And it was like a part-time thing. Then when he went out to the hate and he was putting himself through school, he became a full-time parole parole officer. And again, who knows what to believe with these guys. He said he never intended on doing it once he got his degree. Then he wanted to be a criminologist. His last parole client was Charles Manson, and that ended in '68, and then he stopped. And then he got his degree, and then he became an expert. Well, actually, after the gang research he did, then he shifted over to speed. And he started something called the Amphetamine Project under the auspices of the Haight-ashbury Free Medical Clinic. So that was the fall of '67. He actually had an office open. At that point, they had an annex, another building around the corner, where he opened something called the Amphetamine Project. And Manson would go there for his parole hearings, and they were studying speed and how it influenced some people to be violent, but not other people.

[00:58:25.880] - Speaker 2
And when you say they were studying it, would they give it to people to see how they react?

[00:58:30.090] - Speaker 1
Well, that was it. I think I have a page in my book. If not, it's on my social media. He had a contract, so he would hire grad students. They would go out to speed labs, or they would find speed addicts, and they'd interview them. And the contract that they made with him is, you will be witnessing criminal activity. You could be considered an accessory, but every subject that we study has to remain anonymous, and you are not allowed to cooperate with the police in any of this. You have to sign this contract saying, you won't so we can get these people that we're studying to trust us. That's what he would do. He would gain access to them. At the same time, there was a clinician worker named Alan Rose who ran the hit Asbury Free Medical Clinic under David. He was his protege, and he became completely enthralled with manson and the Women in '67. When the three girls got arrested 1968 in '68 in Mendocino, he went out there with David Smith's money and got them bailed out and hired them lawyers. What did they get arrested for? They went to Mendocino.

[00:59:40.370] - Speaker 1
Manson sent them there to recruit more people for the family. So they were in I forget the name of the town in Mendecino, but they started having these LSD parties, and they loured these three or four 14, 15-year-old boys there, had an orgy with them. One of the boys thought his arms had become rubber bands, and he ran home to his parents, and his parents, one of them was a deputy Sheriff. So they raided the house. So it was for contributing to the delinquency of a minor. Lsd had just become a felony. It wasn't in '66, but '76.

[01:00:15.130] - Speaker 2
In '66, was it legal?

[01:00:16.080] - Speaker 1
It was legal, yeah. I think it became a felony in '66 or '67. So they were up in all these charges. So Alan Rose ended up... All three women were pled out. They pled to lesser charges. And And then the probation officer who... You do a probation report where you interview the friends of each of the three who ended up pleading guilty and recommending to the judge either to send them to prison or to give them probation. He recommended for all three of them that they should go to jail, not prison, for a year because they were very prone to repeating this. He also identified Charles Manson as being the person that they'd said to him were his wives, and he being their criminal ring leader, even though he was down in LA, but they take all their orders from him. They said it to the probation investigator, David Mandel, who I was able to interview. He also interviewed Roger Smith and his wife. Roger Roger Smith and Mrs Smith wrote in the reports for Susan Atkins and Mary Bruner, two women who were later convicted of murder, Susan of multiple murders, Mary Bruner of the murder of Gary Hinman and Topanga.

[01:01:28.240] - Speaker 1
A year before, Roger Roger and his wife wrote these reports saying, these are good women. They're just hippies. They're peaceful. Prison isn't going to help them. They need to be released. David Mandel still recommended to the judge that they not be released, but the judge was lenient and gave them probation. Roger never disclosed in the report or to David Mandel that he was actually Manson's parole officer for the year that he gathered these women and turned into a criminal crime family. That's how I got in the door with Mrs Smith. Mrs Smith never told me that Roger was sleeping with the girls, but other people at the clinic believe that he might have been. Terry Melcher also is definitely sleeping with at least one of the girls who was underage, Ruth Ann Morehouse. And that's what Manson would do to get a man obligated to him was he would give them his youngest, prettiest girls. And then they had this... They became compromised, and he would be able to do... He was a smart guy, man. Yeah, I was telling you that I recently learned that David Smith in an interview on audio tape with someone I know, I should preface it by saying, When my book came out, I learned that David Smith and Roger Smith were considering filing a lawsuit against myself and the publisher.

[01:02:51.360] - Speaker 1
I knew they wouldn't because there's something called discovery, and everything I have is backed up and vetted by... They did an incredible fact check at Little Brown, so they decided not to do it. But David gave an interview after Roger died about a year and a half ago to someone, and he said he would now, with Roger gone, say that he's now wondering whether Roger was involved in some type of governmental program to manipulate manson, because after reading my book and remembering what he had experienced himself, he was looking at it differently. Now, is he saying that because he wants to throw any focus off of him, or does he truly believe it? I'd love to talk to him one more time.

[01:03:34.440] - Speaker 2
Have you reached out?

[01:03:35.550] - Speaker 1
I haven't since the book came out, but there's a few people I want to reach out to now, and you have to do it before they pass away. And he's still in the hate. He actually lost his position on the board of the clinic he founded before my book came out, about five years before, because he was embezzling from it. And he never got criminally charged, but the board sued him in court. They got some of the money back, and he was banned. He wasn't even allowed on the property. And that was his whole identity. So who knows? That's the hardest thing about a book like this. You meet people, and I spent a lot of time with him, probably three or four sit down interviews at his house in the clinic with him in the early 2000s. Lots of phone calls. And you end up liking these people. And you're like, Could they have been this full of malice? Could they have been that evil? And can they lie to me? And then I would find out that they were lying to me.

[01:04:35.730] - Speaker 2
Is it possible, though, if they were working for the government that they thought they were doing something good?

[01:04:40.940] - Speaker 1
Well, yeah, that's one of the biggest defenses of that was if you look at it in the context of the times, the Cold War, the Cuban Missile Crisis happened in '62. Americans really were living with a shadow of nuclear inhalation over their head, and these These agencies were trying to prevent that. But Jolly West was a medical doctor. He was a psychiatrist, medical doctor, and his Hippocratic oath is to protect. And he was giving drugs to people and fucking with their minds. And imagine doing that with someone who's already bipolar or schizophrenia. One of his colleagues who took over the chairman of psychiatry at Oklahoma when he left, this very esteemed professor said something to me. It's in the book that shocked me. Because we talked about, and I don't know if you want to get into it, the Jack Ruby thing. Yeah, tell me. Before I tell you about that, what he said to me, Gordon Deckert, was I said, would West have asked by the government, would he scramble Jack Ruby's mind, which I'll tell you about in a second, if the government asked him to, and Deckard said, if the government asked him to do it and he thought he was doing it for good reasons, he'd do anything they said to him.

[01:05:58.160] - Speaker 1
So, yeah, the Jack Ruby JFK assassination. Who would want to get into that when you're just writing about reporting about manson? And once I found out that Jolly West had this very circumstantially direct relationship with manson during the time period, he became a guru and this leader with incredible magical powers. I looked at West history. He received national Fame right after the Korean War. So '52, '53, there were about 30 or 40 prisoners of war airmen who were captured, fighting for our side in Korea, who were returned to us. But while they were in prison in Korea, they had made public statements that we were using germ warfare over there, which was against the Geneva Code, and that we were evil and awful country. So when they were returned, West and four other psychiatrists were assigned to de-program them.

[01:07:00.190] - Speaker 2
Do we know what they were saying was not true?

[01:07:02.820] - Speaker 1
No. And there's been incredible reporting in just the last 5 or 10 years that we were using germ warfare over there, and they were telling the truth. They were probably coerced, maybe tortured They weren't sleeping and stuff like that. But they ended up telling the truth. What they needed, the United States government, when they came back, they needed them to renounce that. So the psychiatrist, the team that was assigned to them was West, Margaret Singer, Robert Lipton, Edgar Schein, and one other guy, all of them, Robert Lipton is still alive. I believe, work for the CIA. West is the only one I can prove right now. I tried to get Lipton to admit it to me, but he threw me out of his house.

[01:07:42.260] - Speaker 2
What was he like, Lipton?

[01:07:43.660] - Speaker 1
He's considered the leading world's expert on brainwashing. He wrote one of the first books about it. Once we discovered that the Chinese and Russians were brainwashing their own citizens and using drugs and hypnotism and sensory deprivation, he He was a professor at Harvard, and then he retired out in Cape Cod. I got him on the phone a few times, and I wanted him to look at these letters that I had between Gottlieb, the head of MKUltra and Jolly West, because I thought they were very close colleagues, not just during the Korean power episode, but they both testified at the Patricia Hearst trial when she had been the defense set, a victim of brainwashing by the SLA. And I really battered my way into him agreeing to let me come to his house and talk to him. And beautiful house in Cape Cod, and I had my briefcase. I said, do you believe that Jolly was working for MK Ulster during those years? Because I read all that garbage. He would never do that. I'd never do that. We were scientists. We would never take funding. We would never give drugs to people. I said, then you need to look at this.

[01:08:52.930] - Speaker 1
He goes, what is it? And I said, the letters between Sydney Gottlieb and Jolly. In fact, John Marks, the one who wrote The Search for the Manchurian Candidate, he hadn't done interviews for years until he agreed to meet with me. He told me, he said, This is going to happen to you. At this time, it was a magazine article. If you publish this article and it's about MK Ultra, what happened to me is going to happen to you. You're going to have people camping outside your house saying that they're victims of MK Ultra, and you have to help them. He goes, I had to stop lecturing. I just walked away from the subject. Because first, he said he wouldn't talk to me about it. He said, I haven't given an interview on this subject for 25 Five years. Everything I know is in the book. But when I told him I had unredacted letters, he said, I'll see you. And it was the night before Thanksgiving, I went to Georgetown, DC. He said, Come at 11:00.11:00 PM.

[01:09:44.340] - Speaker 1
Pm. I go to the house, and at that point, he's in his late '60s. It was probably 2002 or '03. Lets me in the door, doesn't even say hello. He goes, Let me see what you have. I walk in. His wife leaves the room.

[01:09:56.400] - Speaker 2
Are you looking at photocopies or original photocopies?

[01:09:59.070] - Speaker 1
Photocopies, yeah, that I had He's made from the originals at UCLA. And he's like, If I had these documents, my book would have been entirely different. The investigations would have been different. He goes, This is the only unredacted record of this program I've ever seen. He goes, This is amazing. I didn't need him to verify that it was West at that point. He goes, This is all what we knew he was doing, which he denied. And he goes, And you found it. He goes, Good luck. And he goes, Remember what I said is going to happen to you. Nobody's camped out at my yard yet, but those are among the letters I get from people who want me to help them because they think they're... Maybe some of them are, but most of them probably aren't. So Lipton wouldn't look at the letters. And I said, You're a scientist and a historian. Your field is brainwashing.

[01:10:47.150] - Speaker 2
You're considering- He wouldn't look at the letters.

[01:10:49.290] - Speaker 1
I go, He didn't want to have to admit what he had been denying to me. Another colleague, Margaret Singer, taught at Berkeley for years and was one of the other five scientists. I interviewed her in Berkeley when I was going up to do the hate reporting. She met with me a few times, very close to Jolly. She said, There's no way Jolly work for the CIA. None of us would. Same thing Lipton said. She looked at the letters. She made me turn off my recorder. She said, If you publish this, you will destroy everything lift and shine West and I did. Our entire careers will be thrown out if you publish these letters. I said the same thing to her. I said, You're a professor. History is part of what you teach. You want me? She goes, Yes, it'll just do too much damage. Unfortunately, she wasn't alive when my book came out. Lift and is still alive to this day. It's about '93.

[01:11:40.040] - Speaker 2
It's true, but it's inconvenient.

[01:11:42.080] - Speaker 1
An inconvenient truth. Yeah. Yeah. Those guys went to Valley Forge. The pals were brought to Valley Forge Military Academy, where I grew up, like the next town over. And they were isolated there while Lift and Shine, West, Singer, and one more person, reprogrammed them. And they all came out and publicly said they had been brainwashed in Korea by their Chinese captors and forced to lie. They didn't remember being for all that stuff. There was no germ warfare, and they were all pilots. That's how they were captured. The planes were shot down. So that was Jolly's first national Fame when he was one of those elites. And then in-In all these stories, the people other than the programmers are pawns in the story.

[01:12:34.080] - Speaker 2
Yeah.

[01:12:35.570] - Speaker 1
What did they get for it? I mean, money? They wanted to be on the cutting edge of science, or they were diabolical and wanted to do this for some pleasure, or were they patriots?

[01:12:47.150] - Speaker 2
Yeah. I find it hard to believe that they had bad intentions.

[01:12:51.550] - Speaker 1
I don't want to say that about the other four, but I think Jolly was pretty evil. You think? This is some stuff I know about him personally. I mean, there's a lot I have philanderers. Everybody does it. But I heard stories about what he would do to colleagues, wives. He was fucking everyone. And again, it's not wrong, but you don't do it to your best friend's wife. And this one guy, who I won't say, whose wife became a very prominent cancer researcher herself, said if he saw Jolly, he would spit in his face, if not beat him up. And this is 34 years later. And the son talks about it in the book a little bit about his father was unfaithful to his wife. But he was cruel from what I heard about what he did with students and women and stuff. And the stuff that I believe he did with patients is pretty diabolical. And it's in hindsight, but that meeting with him, again, I would transcribe every interview I ever did. I never even transcribed that tape because I just thought, not that he was evil, but just like, this guy's just this pedantic boy who thinks so much of himself.

[01:13:57.990] - Speaker 1
His ego was very big. So JFK. Jack Ruby.

[01:14:03.870] - Speaker 2
And again, you're not looking for this. No.

[01:14:06.150] - Speaker 1
And when it first started surfacing, I'm like, oh, no, I don't want to go anywhere near the JFK assassination. And when I moved to LA '97, two years before I got this assignment. I had friends who had already lived here, and some of them is a stereotype, but they'd come out to LA and they became such conspiracy-minded, where they hadn't been that way on the East Coast. And it was like they were much more open to people living under the center of the Earth and reptiles and shit. And it scared me. And they also would talk about JFK, and I dismissed all that. And then literally, I'm studying Jolly, and I'm like, wait, he was assigned to Jack Ruby. And Ruby's claim after shooting Oswald. So Oswald is arrested for shooting Kennedy at Deely Plaza, which I went to for the first time ever last week. I was in Texas for something. How was it? It was incredible. I mean, I walked around this place that I had visualized and seen films of, the supporter film, and it feels like nothing has changed in the Plaza. Then I went in their museum, the sixth floor museum, and I was really pleased to see, and I heard this was all the last five or six years, a lot of stuff about the possibility that Oswald didn't act alone, that there was a conspiracy in the displays and things.

[01:15:25.460] - Speaker 2
I think there's a book that really lays out-I think I don't remember.has evidence in the title. Cool.

[01:15:30.800] - Speaker 1
Oh, best evidence is David Lipton, I think.

[01:15:32.930] - Speaker 2
I think maybe it's that one, no?

[01:15:34.650] - Speaker 1
It's a good one. But this guy, Jim Douglas is, he's the one that the most serious people I know, and he's doing a follow-up, and he wanted me to share a lot of my Jack Ruby, Jolly West stuff, which I was glad to do. I said, number one, you're a hero of mine. Number two, I want you to be able to... I mean, you might find stuff in these documents that went right over my head because you're an expert. So I shared everything with him, and I I think he said the book is coming. He's on deadlines, late like I've always been. I think it's coming out in the fall.

[01:16:06.460] - Speaker 2
And the subject of his book?

[01:16:08.080] - Speaker 1
It's the new findings that he's had since his book was published in the '90s about this assassination. I think it's like his swan song before he goes over the rainbow Bridge. A sweet guy lives in Alabama, so he and I have been communicating, sharing information. I think it really changed after Oliver Stone's movie, JFK. They set up something called the assassination Records Review Board, which forced the CIA to at least begin the release process of all its files on Oswald, which finally were supposed to become available during the Trump administration. And twice, Trump turned it down and extended the deadline. And now Biden has done it once, and there's another deadline.

[01:16:54.460] - Speaker 2
So there's still- And whatever they put out was all redacted, I remember.

[01:16:56.330] - Speaker 1
What they put out was redacted, and they're admitting they still have hundreds and hundreds of pages.

[01:16:59.780] - Speaker 2
And how many years ago was this?

[01:17:02.490] - Speaker 1
63.

[01:17:03.600] - Speaker 2
So 63 years ago, and they're still redacting the information from the public? Why?

[01:17:08.710] - Speaker 1
To protect sources. And all the sources have to be dead. Jack Ruby shot Oswald three days after the assassination, when Oswald was being led out of the police station to be transferred to the jail in the basement on live TV in front of cameras, 100 witnesses, his- Just so happened. And what he said after they tackled him, he said, I'm Jack Ruby. Why are you doing this to me? Why am I here? And then the first day or two of his custody, he said he had no memory of the shooting. He said he didn't know why he was there, how he got there. So he never testified at his murder trial of Oswald. He was convicted a year later, like 64. And then he fired his lawyer, Melvin Bella. He got a new lawyer, Hubert Weston Smith, who was a lawyer and a psychiatrist who was a colleague of West and an old friend of West. Smith brought Weston to examine Ruby for an insanity plea. Now, they had already tried the insanity plea in the first trial. He was examined by six psychiatrists. All of them thought he was sane. They said he's prone to excitability, he's manic, but there's no sense that he doesn't know the difference between right and Nothing wrong, this or that.

[01:18:32.530] - Speaker 1
West goes to see him, and I think it was April of '64, '65. He's alone with him in his cell for about an hour and a half, comes out, gives a press conference, announces that in the preceding 48 hours, Jack Ruby had had a psychotic break from which he will likely never recover. He has auditory hallucinations. He sees people in the room who aren't there. He hides under the table because he thinks someone's in the room with us. He hears noises outside. He told me he was Jewish, and he thought it was a Jewish pogrom that was framing him for this. He hears Jewish children being boiled alive outside his jail cell at night. So West continued to treat him for about a year. He would see him once every other month. And from that point forward, Ruby could never have a coherent conversation.

[01:19:27.780] - Speaker 2
He testified- His personality changed after a year in prison, after one meeting.

[01:19:33.510] - Speaker 1
With Jolly West. And Jolly West's very first letter to Gottlieb, he said he wants to learn how to induce insanity in a subject without their knowledge. Now, Ruby finally testified to the Warren Commission. So the Warren Commission sent Earl Warren, who was the head of the commission, the Supreme Court Justice, Jerold Ford and Arlen Specter. Jerold Ford was on the commission. Arlen Specter was an attorney in Investigator for the commission to interview Ruby in Texas, and they had to stop the interview because he was rambling. He was incoherent. He took Arlen Specter aside, who was Jewish, and said, Don't you know they're killing Jews? They're going by on trains to camp. So he never used anything. And then he died a year later of a sudden onset of cancer.

[01:20:20.050] - Speaker 2
Didn't he say he thought that they Poison?

[01:20:22.490] - Speaker 1
Yeah. He thought they poison him. There's a whole world of people out there that they think that Jolly injected him with something to kill him or give him cancer. I can't go that far. But at the very, very least, West was compromised. He couldn't have been... Jack Ruby was called the most important witness in the assassination of John F. Kennedy. Oswald would have been, but he's dead. So the person who killed Oswald is the most important. Well, that person was being treated by someone who was contracted by the CIA to remove true memories, oppressed them with false. In 1955, he reported he been successful at that and also to induce insanity in people. Alan Dulles, who was on the commission, he had been fired by Kennedy. When Kennedy, after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, he fired Dulles, and Kennedy famously said, I'm going to splinter the CIA to a million pieces. Dulles was on the commission. Dulles knew who Jolly West was. Richard Helms, who was the direct supervisor of Gottlieb, and then Gottlieb over West, was a liaison between the commission and the CIA, because Helms was still at the CIA. They knew the minute Ruby became mentally unhinged during the day that West first met him, they had to know, did they disclose that to the rest of the Commission.

[01:21:46.640] - Speaker 1
I doubt it. I couldn't interview any of them. Gerald Ford wouldn't talk to me. He was still alive. I think he was the only one on it. So I believe the whole Warren Commission was compromised. I don't know anything about second and third shooters, of the other stuff. I just kept my narrow focus on the relationship between West and Ruby.

[01:22:10.640] - Speaker 2
Isn't it odd that the same characters appear in all these big stories?

[01:22:14.150] - Speaker 1
West is like a zealig. I mean, he would then-Also, who was the coroner in LA?

[01:22:18.350] - Speaker 2
That was another-Oh, Thomas Noguchi.

[01:22:19.670] - Speaker 1
Thomas Noguchi, yeah. I got to interview him.

[01:22:23.780] - Speaker 2
Tell me about him.

[01:22:25.120] - Speaker 1
I was reporting on Robert Kennedy's assassination, and I really That happened a year before the Tate Lobby Anca murders. Same cops in the LAPD were the cops on the scene at the Ambassador Hotel where Kennedy was shot in the pantry by a lone assassin, Serhan, who also claimed he had no memory of the shooting, no memory of the preceding 24 hours. To this day, he's alive.

[01:22:52.370] - Speaker 2
And who's writing, would just write the same-Yeah, automatic writing.

[01:22:55.920] - Speaker 1
The same phrase is over and over. Hundreds and hundreds of times. He's still alive, no? He's still alive. The Parole Board approved his release for the first time in 50 some, 60 years. I think it was a year and a half ago. But the governor has the authority in California, not all states, I think two-thirds of the states, to overturn a parole board's ruling, so Gavin Newsom wouldn't allow him to be released, which is what he's done in the Madsen family members who have been approved. Leslie Van Houten, one of the women, did get released last year. New Newsom overrode the parole board decision, but Leslie's attorney took Newsom and the state to court, and the appeals court ruled that Newsom wasn't fair, and they released her about a year ago. But the your hand thing, I couldn't find any evidence that West had anything to do with that. I do believe I can't prove, and I'm hardly the first person to say it, Surhan was hypnotized that he fired at Kennedy, at least one One of his bullets killed Kennedy, but there were other bullets. Noguchi, famously, who did the autopsy, said that Sirhan couldn't have shot Kennedy because Sirhan was in front of Kennedy, and the bullet that they said was a killer bullet came from behind his ear.

[01:24:17.060] - Speaker 1
So Noguchi actually lost his job because of that, because he wouldn't stand down. He wouldn't say. And he was able to sue back and get back into the job. And he finished and retired, I think, five or 10 years before I started the book. And now he's alive still. I haven't talked to him in 10 years, but I got him on the phone a couple of times. But yeah, Noguchi is a character. He was a corner of Los Angeles. All kinds of things. Salminio, who was in a couple of James Dean's movies, was killed in West Hollywood. But yeah, so West, Patty Hearst gets kidnapped. And then months after She's a kidnapped abductee. She's holding up a bank in Hibernia, I think, with the SLA, an automatic weapon in her beret, Tanya. So West was the first doctor to see her, to de-program her and basically build a defense that she was brainwashed by being isolated in a closet, being raped, which probably was all true.

[01:25:27.780] - Speaker 2
Do we think the SLA might have been?

[01:25:30.250] - Speaker 1
Oh, yeah. Again, I spent a lot of time. The parallels between Donald DeFries, who founded the SLA and was killed in the fire. There was a big shootout in South Central, I think it was, when they thought they had the entire SLA and Patty Hearst surrounded, and the SLA started shooting back, and they ended up bombing the house, and five or six SLA members were killed, including De Fries, who was a commander. Patty Hearst wasn't there, so she ended up escaping that. But he had a history so similar to mansons. He was getting released when he shouldn't have been released. He had this guy named Colston Westbrook, who was ex-CIA, who was his mentor in prison when he was at Baccavill. He was going in and teaching him and had this contact with him. And again, this isn't my reporting. I don't think I even mention it in my book because I couldn't find out anything new about it, and I couldn't connect it to West. But And Jonestown, that there was some involvement. And I always say, I don't know that they wanted to create the Monsters or the Monsters acts those people did, but I think those people were being manipulated as part of experiments.

[01:26:44.520] - Speaker 2
But then after, all these people are vilified as bad guys, so it's like, Don't do these things. It's got a chilling effect.

[01:26:53.740] - Speaker 1
Oh, yeah. Well, that's what they call it, the climate of tension or whatever, which is we know it first began with the Gulf of Tonkin, when we were trying to declare war against... To join the South Vietnamese and the war against North Vietnamese. And we had to have grounds to do it just like Saddam's chemical weapons, which weren't true. So two of our ships got bombed in the Gulf of Tonkin. And I'm pretty sure the United States government has admitted that they weren't bombed by the North Vietnamese. But that gave us a reason to actually get into the war officially and begin that horrible war. Strategy of tension, it's called. To make people terrified so that the government can... Now, every time there's a school shooting or a mass shooting, I get tons of emails from people who are convinced that that shooter, from some information that they've read about, even in the early coverage within days, was somehow brainwashed to do that. And I always say the same thing, my reporting stops at 74, 75. I can't go there without losing my mind more. Yeah.

[01:28:00.220] - Speaker 2
What was Reclaiming History?

[01:28:02.660] - Speaker 1
Reclaiming History. So then this Buliosi's opus was he was going to prove once and for all that Oswald acted alone in the assassination of John F. Kennedy. So he spent, as long as I did, 20 years, writing what became this 1,200-page doorstop of a book called Reclaiming History, where he attacks chapter by chapter every critic of Warrant Commission finding every author, every public figure, and in his saying takes apart and dissembles all of their arguments for their being a second shooter, all that stuff. Again, I'm not an expert on the Kennedy assassination, but I have the book. I couldn't get through it, but I would go through certain parts of it. And I've seen the critiques of it by the people who attacked him, and they demolished his critiques. And he did what he did with the Manson case. He wrote it as a prosecutor, so he omitted information that wasn't favorable to his thesis. And I did look at, I can't remember which specific chapters, where he attacked books that I really respected. And I'm like, wait, you're not reporting that they found this document, that evidence. And he did this. And I think he really thought it was going to be the last book he did before he died.

[01:29:27.840] - Speaker 1
But he actually lived longer. He's dead now, but he a couple more smaller books.

[01:29:31.500] - Speaker 2
What were the later books about?

[01:29:32.860] - Speaker 1
The later book was a book about his atheism and about how he had become an atheist after being raised a Catholic. Very controversial. So I mean, Bulioci should never have been assigned the mansion case. And I know that, and I have it in the book, because he had a criminal record of his own prior to getting this assignment. This is a plum assignment, right? It's the highest profile murder case in Los Angeles history until OJ, 1969. He was a really smart, really charismatic Deputy DA. I think he was the same age as mansion when he got assigned. They were both 32. So he'd been in the DA's office about three or four years. He had a couple of high-profile murder cases, but nothing that made him a household name. This did. But what wasn't reported until about five years after the case, and I wasn't the first one to report it. People forgot it. It was reported. He ran for attorney general of California. And when he ran for that, there was a man named Herb Weisell and his wife, Rose, who came out and had a press conference to announce that starting in 1966, he'd been stalking them for more than a year.

[01:30:53.650] - Speaker 1
Herb Weisell was his milkman. Vince believed that Herb Weisell was the father of his first born child, Vince Bulioci Jr, was born in '66. So that lost him the election. It was reported in all the papers. He denied it. He lied. What he said was, Here's the truth. Herb Weisell was my milkman. We believe, my wife and I, that he stole $200 from our kitchen because we would let him have access to put the milk in the fridge. So I was investigating him about that. What his opponents pointed out was, even if that were true, when he was investigating him starting '67, '68, the statute of limitations was over. He couldn't have done anything if he found it out. He never reported it to the police. He was using DA's investigator saying the milkman was a witness to a murder case who didn't want to testify and he needed him followed. He went to the house and was parked in front of the milkman's house. He went to the door, beg the wife to get her husband saying we're both duped, to get him to do a blood test. She said, You're crazy. Get off the property.

[01:32:06.310] - Speaker 1
He sent his wife to the wife's house to do the same thing. The wife said, Please just have your husband do this. My husband's insane. And she goes, Just stay away from us. We're terrified of you. At that point, they didn't know he was a deputy DA. They knew he had some official capacity downtown. Then they had someone follow him after he had followed them, traced his license plate, reported him to the DA's office. They had a meeting. Vince promised not to bother this couple anymore, to walk away from it. He offered to pay them like $600 in damages. They said, We don't want to die. Just stay away from us. So when he's running for attorney general, they thought the world needs to know how crazy he is. So he lied to the press. They ended up suing him then for liable for making up this story. He settled with them, gave them money. Then he ran for district attorney of Los Angeles, two years later, same thing happened. A woman comes out, has a press conference. Virginia Carville said, I was Vince's mistress, 73 and 74. I got pregnant. I'm Catholic. He wanted me to have an abortion.

[01:33:16.650] - Speaker 1
I wouldn't do it. He said I had to. He set it up, paid the doctor. I lied to him. He called the doctor, and the doctor violated his Hippocratic oath and said she never came in for the abortion. He went to her apartment in Santa Monica, beat the hell out of her. She miscarried. She went to the Santa Monica Police Department. I have the photographs of her bruised face, bruised arms, filed a report. The next morning or that night, the Beat reporters, they get a teletype from the courthouses, saw that the charges had been filed. It was all over the papers that Vince had beaten up his mistress. And he goes back to her apartment with his secretary She has a son who's four, I think. Secretary goes in the bedroom to occupy the son, then spends three or four hours begging her, threatening her to go to the police and say she filed a false report. He said, They will arrest you, but here's a story we're going to tell them. She had originally contacted him about getting support payments from her ex-husband. He wasn't paying child support, and that's when their affair began.

[01:34:28.570] - Speaker 1
He said, You're going to say we I've never met face to face. I consulted with you once on the phone, and I've never been in this apartment. She got so beaten down that she called up the police Department and she said, I want to come in and withdraw my report. I filed a false report. They sensed that something was wrong. This is my report. This was reported, but not this part. I found this out because I found the cop who went. The cops, they said, We'll come pick you up. And she goes, And Vince was like, No, you go in. So she said, No, I'm coming in. Well, they knew to send a patrol to cops there. They got to the apartment, and this is how powerful Vince was. None of this part was reported. He wouldn't let them in the house. He was in private practice, and he got his partner, Robert Steinberg. The two of them wouldn't let them in the house to get her. They called the DA. Santa Monica had his own DA then. I tried to interview him in Malibu. He wouldn't talk to me. They took her. She filed, said it was a false report.

[01:35:27.220] - Speaker 1
She was arrested. Vince said, I'll take care of it. The DA dropped the charges quietly two or three weeks later. The papers reported that she had withdrawn it, that she was angry. The story was that he wouldn't give her back her $200, something ridiculous. So he lied about that to police. The police interviewed him. When he ran for office the second time, she came out and he lost again. So this was a pattern of conduct. When I confronted him, not the first year, but six years later, I said, Vince, I need to bring everything and show you what I'm going to report. At that point, it's a book. First, he pretended not to know who I was. After knowing, he's tracking me. He's calling people before and after I interview them. Finally agreed, because I knew that he had to keep control, to talk to me at his house. I went to his house And just like I had in '99, we spent about four or five hours at his kitchen table. We didn't leave the house that day, screaming and screaming and shouting and threatening me. He said, I will hurt you like you've never been hurt before.

[01:36:28.070] - Speaker 1
Do you have any idea what I can do to I will own Penguin Press, which I think was your publisher. He started writing them letters. They got their first letter. Was Scott Moyer your editor there? Yeah. Scott was my editor for five or six years. He got that letter and he called me up and he said, I know from all you've told me how crazy he is, but this letter is insane. It was, I think, 18 pages, single space with 20 pages of exhibits and footnotes. So he said, We have to show it to our in-house attorney. That attorney looked at it. He called me and he said, Tom, you have to tell me, is he senile or is he mentally ill? He goes, I was in law school when the Tate lab beyond control. He said, he was a hero to us law students. This letter was not written by that person. I said, he's not senile. He hadn't even finished his Kennedy book yet. He's lecturing. He's got this Kennedy book coming out. He's insane. Wow. So we're claiming history is how we got to that. I believe, can't prove, but that Vince was in the pocket of the agency.

[01:37:39.080] - Speaker 1
And I think that he got this assignment to Tate La Bianca because he was compromised. Evan Younger, who was an ex-FBI man, the head DA, who had covered up Kennedy assassination a year earlier, he's the one who picked Vince to do this. He needed someone who had to do what they told him to do, and they should have fired him in '68, when they found out what he had done to the milkman.

[01:38:03.190] - Speaker 2
Do we think that's a pattern that they have compromised people who do what they say because they don't want to be outed for whatever it is?

[01:38:13.290] - Speaker 1
Yeah, that's how they work, I believe.Wow. And again, I'm not the first one, and other people have much better evidence of it than I do.

[01:38:20.120] - Speaker 2
What do you think it is about that window of time '68, '69 that continues to fascinate us so much?

[01:38:28.390] - Speaker 1
Probably because even the Joan Diddy and thing. All of a sudden, it seemed like overnight, the image of the hippie. I was 10 years old when these murders happened. I don't remember at all anything about Charles Manson. My brother, who's eight years older than me, swears that I was obsessed with it and reading about it. I remember wanting to be a hippie, romanticizing what I was reading. You would listen to the Mamas and the Papas, not the Beatles, but the '67, '68 bands. And I just thought it was so beautiful and cool. And then when the tape murders happened, well, I wasn't a part of the community, but the people here then realized, again, if you believe one of the thesis of my book, that this was an operation to neutralize the left wing movement, to make hippies all of a sudden seem like the big bad boogie men. So I talk about not just MK Alder, but the CIA had a program called Chaos. Fbi had something called Cointel Pro. Both of those operations were begun in San Francisco in 1967. Cointel Pro and Chaos, specifically to figure out a way to stop what was becoming this mighty Black Power Movement by the Black Panthers and also the anti-war movement.

[01:39:50.590] - Speaker 1
So that was begun under the auspices of Ronald Reagan, who was governor. Richard Holmes then was the director of the CIA. And in Los Angeles, of the Sam Yordee was the mayor. They all were approved that it knew it was happening. And the goal of those agencies was to use undercover guys, maybe some women, to infiltrate the Panthers, the anti-war demonstrators, and then set them up for crimes, in the case of the Panthers, which they could be killed for by cops who get them to have a meeting with guns or something and then have the cops storm the meeting and have a shootout or get a rival to believe that the Panthers were about to attack them, or in this case, the US slaves who were their rival in Los Angeles thought they were because they were being fed information from the FBI. That happened at UCLA. Two people were killed at a meeting at UCLA. I think it was January of '69, eight months before the tape murders, because the slaves had believed that... I can't remember which was which was about to attack. So they both went to do it before, and they killed of two people.

[01:41:01.140] - Speaker 1
All this came out in the '70s when a bunch of investigators raided a warehouse in Pennsylvania and stole the FBI files that they knew were there, which exposed the whole Cointel Pro program. Later, the FBI admitted to being responsible for actual killings.

[01:41:20.770] - Speaker 2
Had those files not been found, we would never know about it.

[01:41:24.150] - Speaker 1
Yeah, there's a great documentary that came out a few years ago, and I think it was the night of the Fraser. A lead fight or some big sporting event where they knew the security guard would be glued to his TV, that they were able to sneak into the window and get all these files out. Again, when you get the paperwork and the original documents, there's no refuting it unless you can say they're forgery. But Geronimo Pratt, the famous Panther, who spent something like 30 years in prison for killing two people playing tennis in Santa Monica, was frame with that murder. The FBI was surveilling him. They knew he was in San Francisco when that couple was killed, but they needed him behind bars. So they had that murder done and then had him. And they admitted it when he was released, I think late '90s or early 2000s. He was finally exonerated and released. And the FBI admitted that they knew he couldn't have done it because he was in San Francisco. So that stuff was going on all the time. In my book, I have the document. But Hoover wrote to the field agent in LA, the head of the field FBI field office.

[01:42:31.000] - Speaker 1
I think it was the winter of '68 to '69, definitely before the tape murders. They were worried about the White Panther Party. The White Panthers were basically celebrities who supported and had fundraisers for the Black Panthers, famously, Warren Beatty, Jane Fonda, Donald Sutherland and his wife. And Hoover wrote a memo saying, We need to make these Whites believe that when the revolution finally happens, they're going to be lined up against the wall and executed with everyone else. So it was a propaganda campaign. And when manson was on the front pages of all the papers, December first, after he was charged, and they announced that they had this group of hippies in custody who lived on a commune previously at Spone Ranch here in Chatsworth and then out in Death Valley, the girls were giving interviews, the ones who weren't arrested, with babies nursing, long hair, beads, barefoot, but they looked terrifying. And then mansons, photographs and mug shots. All of a sudden, the hippies. That's the other thing, how it changed Hollywood, how it changed the nation. People wouldn't pick up hippies hitchhiking anymore. They were terrified of them. They could kill you. Lsd could turn your kids into killers.

[01:43:49.680] - Speaker 1
The lack of structure, family, the free love, everything was the most dangerous thing. And Johnson said when he was President, Hoover and Holmes, they all said, the greatest threat to national security is this revolution that's coming, this youth movement from the Panthers to the anti-war demonstrators. They're a bigger threat than Chinese, Communist, or Russia to our national Security. It has to be stopped.

[01:44:16.670] - Speaker 2
Did you see Once Upon a Time in Hollywood? Yeah. How did you react?

[01:44:20.870] - Speaker 1
So I'm a dummy about Tarantino. I like his movies, but I hadn't seen a lot of them. I knew that he had a twist ending, and he was very good at keeping it a secret. I had a friend who had a kid who was like, 15, and about a month or two before the movie was released, my book came out the same month. Is that true? The publisher changed the release date to coincide with Quentin's movie because they knew that it would get a lot of attention. That's a good idea. It's a good idea business-wise, but to me, it felt exploitative.

[01:44:51.090] - Speaker 2
But I didn't argue. No, it doesn't change the book at all. No, it doesn't. It's just promotion.

[01:44:56.550] - Speaker 1
I'm sure it helped. But my friend's kid said to me, I bet he does what he did in Inglourious Bastards. I'd never seen it. His name was Bo. I go, Bo, what did he do in Inglourious Bastards? He goes, Oh, all the bad guys get killed. They kill Hitler. I go, Who? He goes, The Americans. They stormed in this theater and kill all the Nazis. I said, that's interesting. I guess I should see it. But you know, Bo, if he did that in one movie, he's not going to... It's a trick. You can't do it twice. So I waited the day it opened. I wanted to see it before I learned anything. I didn't read anything more. I had no idea what was going to happen. So when they get to the Night of the killings and they don't go to a house occupied by the victims, but the name, I'm like, what? Oh, he's completely fictionalizing it. So I watched that scene where Brad Pitt kills everybody. And I was bothered by it because it was so brutal. And I kept thinking, all right, it's a revenge fantasy. The bad guys get killed. But it seems to demeaning to the people who really died that night because it just didn't feel right.

[01:46:06.320] - Speaker 1
And people were cheering and laughing the more brutal it got. And I almost walked out. I didn't. And then I kept watching. And then if you remember how it ends, DiCaprio gets invited onto the property, and Jay Sebring invites him, and Sharon, and Wojcick. And then you have the little tinkling music, and then the title, Once Upon a Time in Hollywood. And I'm like, Oh, it's a fairytale. What if? And I almost cried. And I thought, It's so moving. It's genius.

[01:46:38.510] - Speaker 2
I thought it was really brilliant.

[01:46:40.510] - Speaker 1
And then Quentin, he got in touch with me. So I have a friend who It's been his first AD forever. A friend of a friend and another woman who was one of his last girlfriends before he got married. They both got him copies of my book before it came out. He never read it. He was finishing his movie, publicizing it. But about six months Just after his movie came out, my friend Billy, who was his first AD, sends me an email. He goes, Quentin is writing a novelization of his movie because originally he wanted to write a book and not a movie. He goes, he'd love to talk to you. Would you mind getting on the phone with him? I'm like, yeah, of course. So Clinton starts calling me from Israel. I think his wife is Israeli. They went over there, and then they got stuck there because of COVID. So he called me two or three nights. And I don't know if you know him. Rapid fire questions. And I tried to answer, then he started... But he was really sweet because his book came out. He sent me... I don't know how he got my...

[01:47:41.470] - Speaker 1
Probably from Billy. Got my address, sent me an inscribed copy.Beautiful. And then when he went out to promote the book, he went on Marc Maron first, talked about how important my book was to his...

[01:47:52.590] - Speaker 2
Great.

[01:47:53.610] - Speaker 1
And then he goes on Rogan, and the two guys then brought out about the... And I already knew Rogan likes my book, but the two of them talking about it. And Tantino says this to Rogan. He goes, Tom took my call. He agreed to talk to him. I'm like, I've been living alone with nobody listening to me for 20 years. I would take your call, whether I did have a book or not. Of course, I'm going to take your call. But it felt good. The two of them have really helped the book.

[01:48:24.970] - Speaker 2
It's such a good book.

[01:48:26.610] - Speaker 1
Oh, thanks.

[01:48:27.070] - Speaker 2
It's so good. It really is thought-provoking and mind-opening.

[01:48:33.570] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I mean, a couple of people, this guy, Jim Douglas, who wrote the Kennedy book, he said to me, and you didn't need to say this, he's very old and he's written the definitive. He said, your book has changed that whole world. The fact that you were able to get that stuff published by a mainstream publisher, that's opening the door for the rest of us. He goes, You have no idea how important it is. And I've heard that from other researchers. I'm like, I was just trying to finish a fucking magazine story and not look like the fool who wasted his life.

[01:49:05.970] - Speaker 2
Do you think there was an occult side to the murders?

[01:49:09.480] - Speaker 1
We know, again, I try to look at it in the context of the times. Sharon Tate, in the interview, before she was killed, said that she was studying witchcraft. She was also doing her last movie, Thirteen Chairs, which was about the occult. It was what she left Italy to come back to the house for in July, and then she was killed in August. She didn't clarify if she was reading and studying that for the role. Roman is so fucking complicated when you try to look at Rosemary's Baby and wonder Did this somehow become karmically a consequence of him making that movie, where this baby is taken from the mother's womb by a Satanus? And there was a rumor I remember that to this day, a lot of people believe. They believe that Sharon's baby was cut out of her by the manson family. Susan Atkins said that they wanted to, but they didn't. They did stab her in the abdomen, but they didn't cut the baby out. Then, of course, the manson family, people believe that they were somehow being manipulated or influenced by the Process Church, which was a satanic church that blossomed in the hate in '67.

[01:50:29.750] - Speaker 2
What do I know about them. I don't know anything about them.

[01:50:32.830] - Speaker 1
Oh, gosh. Well, they began in England in '64, '65, and it was about 20 or 30 Satanists who were patriarchal. The men were the bosses. The women were slaves. It was communal free sex.

[01:50:49.340] - Speaker 2
Were they hippies?

[01:50:50.890] - Speaker 1
No, they were intellectuals. I spent a lot of time looking into the possibility that they somehow influenced mansion. They could never find anything solid. So I walked away from it. I'm not fresh with the information. But what's interesting is, Ed Sanders wrote... The first book about the case was called his book, The Family. He was reporting on it for the LA Free Pest, the underground paper. It came out about a year and a half before Helter Skelter. Sanders had a whole chapter basically saying the process, Manson learned a lot of his mind control and powers from the Process Church and Scientology. So the process sued him successfully in England, and Sanders had to go over there and testify, and they ended up taking out the chapter from the subsequent copies. It was ordered, removed. And you can get it. By who? Well, actually, the publisher thought, since they were successful in England, they threatened to do it in the States, which is harder to do. I know that because the only compromise I made with the reporting of my book, Nothing. Little Brown didn't ask me to take anything out. But my British publishers said, We have to remove about four or five anecdotes about Roman being physically abusive to Sharon.

[01:52:14.560] - Speaker 1
So I interviewed Sharon's closest friends, and they told me some horrific stories that are in the American edition. One of them is about Roman smashing Sharon's face into a mirror. I think that was on their honeymoon. Another about him torturing her by throwing a brick into the pool. So her dog was trying to get the brick and was drowning, and she had to jump and get it another time. She was wearing the same dress at a second party they'd been to, and he told her to go home and change it, and she wouldn't. And he pushed her in the pool in front of a whole party. So it's much easier to sue for defamation in the UK than it is here. I fought a little bit against it, and then I thought, I don't care. It's not important. I've got the verbal stuff he did to her, not a lot of physical stuff in there, and it paints a pretty accurate picture. So I think that Sanders, publisher here, said, We can't take the risk. Once they started doing the second and third editions, it was gone. So they did visit Manson in prison before the trial.

[01:53:16.060] - Speaker 1
He did publish a letter to their followers in their magazine, but I don't think anybody has ever been able to prove to my satisfaction that they had any significant relationship. What's interesting, though, is they disbanded in, I think, the '80s, and they still exist, but they're a very well-known animal rights group with a farm in upstate New York, and it's the original founders. They're all now, if they're alive in their '80s, running this sanctuary for dogs and cats and animals.

[01:53:48.180] - Speaker 2
What was atua?

[01:53:50.070] - Speaker 1
Oh, that was Manson's air, trees, water, animals. Not until he was convicted did he announced that he wanted to to become an ecological guru. So from prison, he was making pronouncements about... Actually, he was ahead of his time about climate change. I think it was also a ruse for him to get money in prison. So he would get funds and his followers who still exist to this day. I mean, original. There's Sandra Good, Squey From, Nancy Pitman. There's at least four or five women who still support him, and they don't do hardly anything publicly anymore. But usually, if they do, they do it under the banner of advancing Ottawa. Was it ever genuine? I don't know.

[01:54:44.640] - Speaker 2
Did you hear the Disgraced Land podcast episode about manson?

[01:54:50.460] - Speaker 1
I don't know who that is.

[01:54:51.510] - Speaker 2
It's a cool podcast, and there's a story about what was happening at the Tate house that's much different than the story that we know and it involved ritual crazy stuff.

[01:55:03.960] - Speaker 1
What's interesting is if they're saying that happened when Roman was leasing it, he and Sharon moved in the very last day of February or first week of March. And then by the fourth week of March, he went off to London to begin working on an adaptation of Day of the Dolphin that he wanted to direct. And she went to Italy. They left the same day, but on different planes. She went to make 13 chairs So from March until July, it was Abigail and Wojcczek there. And then they were the ones who really brought in the underbelly. And I do write about... I wonder, how long ago was the podcast? In the last couple of years?

[01:55:43.090] - Speaker 2
Last couple of years. It's really interesting. You'll like it.

[01:55:45.430] - Speaker 1
Oh, no, I'm going to find it. Yeah. I mean, I write a little bit about it. The original suspects...

[01:55:51.780] - Speaker 2
Mama Cass is in that as well.

[01:55:53.340] - Speaker 1
Oh, yeah. So the guys who were originally suspected were named Charles Tacko, Billy Doyle, Tom Harrigan, and Pick Dawson. Pick Dawson was a Washington, DC, rich preppy kid whose father was a diplomat. And he had everything at his fingertips. He started dating Cass in '66, '67.

[01:56:17.120] - Speaker 2
Was he a drug dealer, maybe?

[01:56:18.330] - Speaker 1
He was a drug dealer, an international drug dealer, and her friends despised him. She finally broke up with him and then just moved over to Billy Doyle, his best friend. And those guys were selling drugs to the people at the Tate house and spending a lot of time there. And they probably talk about the rape of Billy Doyle when he supposedly Billy was anally penetrated by JC, was given drugs, and then raped by J. C. Brigham-voyech. I was able to confirm the story because-That's a true story? Well, Billy Doyle denied it. I talked to... He's still alive. He's in Canada. I talked to him on the phone, and it's like talking to Madison. He speaks in riddles, he denies whatever. But he definitely was Cass' lover at the time of this. Charles Tako, who was a drug dealer, an ex-Merine military intelligence guy. He and Billy Doyle were partners. Tako's daughter married Steve Wynwood. Tako was part of the music scene. He told me on tape because I interviewed him at his nursing home. I took him out to Coco's, some restaurant, and he said to me that he got a call, and this is part of the official story, that Billy was unconscious at the house, that he'd been drugged and raped.

[01:57:39.750] - Speaker 1
So he said, he tells me this on tape. I actually on my Instagram and Facebook page, very early, everything's chronological, so you'd have to go back to 2019. I posted the audio tape with documents where he tells the story of driving up to Cielo Drive, finding Billy passed out, and he said his pants were sheared and belt were sheared and Belt was sheared from behind. He'd been raped. Threw him in his car, brought him to Cass's house, had chains in his car for another operation he was on. He said, But thank God I had them because I chained Billy to Cass's tree because I knew when Billy woke up, he'd try to go back and kill everyone. This was July, about six weeks before the murders. So this was a well-known story in Hollywood Billy had been raped and brought... Candice Bergen was the first one to tell the police. And he was chained to the tree for, I think, 24 hours. And taco tells me in the interview, the cast thought it was hysterical and went out and took Polaroid pictures of him. And Charles said, I got Billy's father on the phone in Canada, who was also military intelligence.

[01:58:52.740] - Speaker 1
And he said, Billy, you can't go and kill those people. Charles is going to take you to Mexico or Jamaica, get you away because if anything happens to them, I mean, I'd love to hear that podcast and see what they report, but it's in the police records. He only mentions that he tells a story about Roman having a housewarming party a week after they moved there, and Doyle, Harrigan, Dawson, and tackle crashing it. And Doyle stepped on Bill Tenet, who was Roman's manager, a big agent at that time or manager, stepped on his foot, and Doyle and Tenet got in a fight, and Roman had them thrown out. And the death to pigs that was in blood on the front door when the police started hearing stories about Pick Dawson and these other three guys having a beef, they thought it was death to Pick. I'm still not convinced that those guys weren't involved. I mean, there was another actress named Corinne Calvet, who was Charles Tacco's girlfriend. She told me on the record that Tacco brought Manson to her house, and he peed in her pool, and she threw him out of the house.

[01:59:57.850] - Speaker 1
So that's why the book's so to write because there's all these conflicting stories, and you don't know which one to believe. No.

[02:00:06.110] - Speaker 2
And a lot of people were on drugs and hallucinating. It's a weird time.

[02:00:11.200] - Speaker 1
I went to see... Do you know Dave Mason? Yeah.

[02:00:14.100] - Speaker 2
I mean, I don't know him, but I know him.

[02:00:15.660] - Speaker 1
So Tako and Billy Doyle were his drug suppliers, and he let me talk to him after he did a show. This was the early 2000s. He thought we were talking about Cas. I misled him. And when I brought up their names, he basically said, They're still alive. He goes, They are the most dangerous people that you'll ever encounter. I can't talk to you anymore. And he had me... I had to leave his dressing room at the Troubador somewhere.

[02:00:40.540] - Speaker 2
How do you think the story would have been different if Charlie would have gotten a record contract and made music?

[02:00:48.020] - Speaker 1
I don't believe he really wanted that. I think that that was part of the myth. He told Melcher he didn't believe in contracts, he didn't believe in studios, he didn't believe in When he was released in '67 from prison, his only contacts outside of jail were in Los Angeles. I don't know if you know who Phil Kaufman is. He wrote a book called Roadmangler Deluxe. He was the road manager for the Rolling Stones a little bit. Ultimately, for the last 10 or 15 years, he's been Emmylou Harris's road manager. So he's a dinosaur. He's been around forever. He met Manson when he was in prison on drug smuggling charges at Terminal on a National Island in '67. So prior to Manson's release, he gave Manson two or three people in the music industry to see about recording. And Manson was allowed, when he was paroled, he was supposed to stay in LA. But he immediately left LA and went to the hate, where he had no connections. He was in violation of his parole. And that's all covered in my book.

[02:01:54.510] - Speaker 2
Immediately-and do we know why that is?

[02:01:56.310] - Speaker 1
I only speculate. I believe he was sent there to begin what became Roger Smith was waiting for him.

[02:02:02.420] - Speaker 2
Can you think of an example of a lead that you got that you followed for a long period of time, but it took you nowhere?

[02:02:09.790] - Speaker 1
So many. Here's the thing. I did it for 20 years. I would say, generously, half of those 20 years were spent on dead ends. I would spend months digging into something.

[02:02:26.970] - Speaker 2
Give me an example of a dead end.

[02:02:28.030] - Speaker 1
Well, trying to show that Serhan West were connected, or if not West, one of his colleagues, at least a year, getting all of the courthouse records, interviewing all the people who'd written about it. The process, I probably spent months on the process. Those guys, Doyle, Harrigan, Dawson, so much of that didn't end up in my book. The one thing I did, I didn't throw away any of my reporting. To this day, I have everything in binders. One thing I got very good at that I learned by osmosis was organizing and indexing all of my stuff. And I think there's a photo in my book from six years ago of what my apartment looked like then. And that was when I was in my Venice Bungalow, where everything spilled out of the living room where my office was because it was a one bedroom. It took over the whole place. Now my apartment I've been in since 2014 is two bedroom. I'm able to contain everything in one, but I've got about 400 binders like black binders. But the stuff that I didn't use, sometimes it all of a sudden did become relevant. So I'd be doing all this reporting, Nazis.

[02:03:42.230] - Speaker 1
The Spahn's Ranch was next door to a guy named Frank Retz, who was in the Nazi Party, who somehow got over here and was trying to buy the Spahn Ranch from George Spahn. He ends up dying mysteriously a couple of years later. His whole Nazi past was hidden from the American authorities. Rocket dying, which is in Chatsworth, is a rocket mission where they brought the original Nazi scientists in Operation Paper Club, Bormann, whatever. All these guys were over there developing-In Chatsworth? In Chatsworth. And if you go there now, I did a lot of research on that. If you do pull up beyond a certain perimeter, black cars come out. I've not tested it, but if you go too far, a helicopter comes out. It's still still existing. So I spent so many months trying to prove that Manson, who was a neo-nausee eventually and thought Hitler was a genius, might have been having contact with these guys somehow. And maybe one out of 10 times, something I had researched heavily became important later. That's why I still, to this day, I've saved everything.

[02:04:53.020] - Speaker 2
Was there any point in the process where you thought the book might never come out? Oh, my God.

[02:04:57.470] - Speaker 1
Yeah. So We sold it in 2005 to Scott and Anne Godoff. That was incredible because I had probably one of the best agents in the business, and he was a genius. My proposal was 220 pages. It was book length. My agent made everybody sign an NDA. He went to, I think, three publishers, and two of the three made offers right away. And then Anne and Scott offered a pre-empt meaning they knew that since other publishers were really interested, it could go to auction. So the way it was explained to me is they made a more generous offer than they normally would, hoping to fend off at getting too expensive. And when they made that offer, I said to Sloan, and this is credit to you, I mean, to your book, I said, who is the best publisher in the United States that's going to give me the most, not leverage, but we're publishing a conspiracy book. He said, if you publish with Penguin Press, they publish the books of presidents and cabinet members. He goes, you're automatically going to have that stamp of approval. It's going to be taken seriously. I said, so let's go with them.

[02:06:16.030] - Speaker 1
So that was great. I got an enormous offer. Sloan, my agent, has lots of big clients. He said he'd never had a first-time author get that money. I'll never forget. After we sold it, then we had a celebratory meeting with Scott and Anne. And Anne said to me, and she's revered in the publishing world as being just so fucking smart. She said, your book is here in this proposal. This is the guts. All you need is to fill it out a little bit. And I said, I still need about two or three years. She goes, I understood. So in 2012, they canceled my deal. Scott promised me, and I put this in the book. I don't care if he gets mad. He and I had a meeting outside Penguin after Because I needed to know from him that he hadn't thought I'd gone crazy, and that wasn't why they were canceling it. So he said to me, We have to meet away from the office, and you can't ever tell anybody about this meeting. I think I'd talked about it before. It might even be in the book. But he said to me, and I thought he got emotional.

[02:07:19.600] - Speaker 1
He's a nice guy. He said to me, I know that you didn't spend our money, the advance, on hookers and blow. He goes, I've been to your house. I see the car you drive. I know every penny we gave you went back into that. The one thing you can be assured of is we're never going to try to get the money back. So when you get an advance, you get a third or a quarter. That's what they'd given me, which was a lot, and it was all gone. Six months later, they sued me, and my agent said it was the most humiliating day in the business when he got papers delivered at his desk. So long story short, and he told me, he goes, it was a business decision. When he didn't tell me, what happened later was, Random House was about to acquire Penguin Press. I found out later, Random House said, You got to cut loose anything that's draining money that's not going to be publishable in the next six months. I see. Or we're not going to do the sale.

[02:08:12.810] - Speaker 2
It was like a corporate thing.

[02:08:14.450] - Speaker 1
Corporate. I believe that that was the truth. I don't know why they ended up suing me, but they did. So that put the book on hold. Sohn said to me, he goes, Until this lawsuit is resolved, I can't try to resell it. I know you're never going to stop reporting and trying to tell your story. But he goes, I can tell you now, with this Blackmore, Penguin Press, the most respected publishing house suing you, it's going to be really hard to sell. But I wouldn't stop. But then I think about that. Actually, no, before then, when I sold the book to Penguin in 2005, called my parents. Then I called one of my best friends, and she said, I promised your mother I'd never... She was very close to my parents. She said, I promise your mother I'd I'll never tell her this, but they called me about three years ago to ask because she saw me a lot more than they did in LA. They were worried about your mental health, and they wanted to know from me if you were okay. And I said, you were. And when I told my mom, she goes, I told her never to tell you that.

[02:09:18.390] - Speaker 1
So when Penguin pulled the plug, I lost a lot of confidence. Scott said he never stopped leaving, and he hoped I was going to resell it. But I couldn't stop because I had to validate myself.

[02:09:34.630] - Speaker 2
And I knew-How many years was it at that time?

[02:09:36.960] - Speaker 1
2012. So that was 13 years of reporting. And then the lawsuit was resolved in 17. And I never stopped reporting. And at that point, when it's resolved, I started pestering my agent. You got to take it out. And he was giving me the brush off. I think he wasn't ready to deal with it again. I I found somebody who I knew. I knew I needed a collaborator, but I found somebody who was published but was too old to do it. And I said, Sloane, if you can't find me a collaborator, I'm going with this guy. And he said, I'll meet them. It was two people. And he said, They're sweet, they're accomplished, but in their 80s, they're too old to help you with this. So I said, You know what? I got an idea. Let me call you back in an hour. He calls me back in an hour. He goes, We've got a really young whipper snapper here. The stupidest name, Dan Pipenbring. He said, He's 28 or 29, never written a book, but he just had to leave a project because the subject died, and the subject was Prince. So Prince had hired Dan to be He's a ghost writer for his book.

[02:10:47.710] - Speaker 1
He had been traveling with Prince for about three months when Prince was touring, getting Prince's story. Prince dies, and then everything has to stop until the estate settled. It was my lawsuit. Dan couldn't continue. They guess that it would take about two years for the Prince's estate to be settled. I think it was longer. And I'm like, I'll meet with him, Sloan, but he's 28, 29. He's not even going to know. He wasn't even alive when the mansum. So I met with the guy. First, he sent me some articles he'd written, and I could tell the guy's like a savant. Then I met with him, and he became my collaborator in 2017. We revised the proposal, shrunk it from 220 pages to 30, resold it. I really thought, I'm going to be the crazy old man who's got piles of shit that amount to nothing. When I had those thoughts, I had written down on an index card six or seven bullet points of my most important findings that had never been reported. And I would pull it out and look at it, and that would reinvigorate me not to give up. But when you ask how many times did I think it was not going to be a book, sometimes once a day for a year.

[02:12:00.850] - Speaker 1
I would wake up at night. That was my nightmare.

[02:12:03.990] - Speaker 2
Has there been talk of a film of the book?

[02:12:06.750] - Speaker 1
Yeah. We originally sold it to Amazon Studios. They got a hold of the Little Brump, the 2017 proposal, which they weren't supposed to get. There was an embargo, but they got it and bought the scripted rights in 2017. And I didn't want to do it because I said to Sloan, my agent, I said, They want to do a feature film. They haven't seen the book, but when When they see the book, they're not going to be able to talk. It has to be like a series on streaming or whatever. And so I said, Well, wait till they get the book. He said, If you don't do it... Because I was so broke and borrowing money, driving an Uber at that point. I just started that and I hated it. He goes, You'll get this chunk of money, and then you and Dan can just do the book for the next year and a half. So I took it. They renewed the option, which is great. Got a writer, great writer, guy I really liked. He came out and spent a week with And at the end of the week, he said, Now I know why it took you 20 years.

[02:13:04.960] - Speaker 1
And he goes, And I don't know how I'm going to do this because they're still insisting on a feature film. How am I going to condense it? So he wrote it with his hands tied behind his back. A year, year and a half later, he turned it into Amazon, and they pulled the plug on it. I had been working with Erl Morris in 2014 when Penguin filed the lawsuit. Erl had originally been approached by Scott, who's his editor at Penguin Press. Errol has written some books. He thought he'd be perfect for me. And I said, okay, let him read the original proposal. Errol read it, and then Scott sent an email. It was from Errol to him saying, I don't want to write this guy's book. I want to do a movie of it. This was when it was still in play. They hadn't canceled the deal. Scott said, all right, we'll get back to you when the book is done. Jump ahead, the thing's canceled. And all of a sudden I'm like, Sloan says I can't resell it for two or three years. Maybe I'll reach out to Errol, and if he still wants to make a film, I can do that just to get some money.

[02:14:01.940] - Speaker 1
And it might be the only way I'm ever able to tell the tale. So I just took his email address. I'd never communicated with him, and I sent him an email saying, I don't know if you know, but Penguin canceled my deal. I'm being sued. I checked with a lawyer, and they don't own the film rights, just the book, and there's no book. So if you're still interested, he called me that day. So long story short, for a year, he and I worked together developing it. And I have a love-hate relationship with Erl. After we'd shot a teaser and he sold it to Netflix as a series, which is what I wanted, with someone who a lot of people think is the best documentary filmmaker alive, He suddenly changed his vision. There's a guy named Eric Olson, whose father, Frank Olson, was probably killed by the CIA. Wormwood. Yeah. So I'm talking about that when he's filming me. He came to LA and filmed me in my bungalow for a day. And then on the sound stage, talking about the Olson case and talking about Eric. He says, Oh, do you think Eric would be interviewed by me?

[02:15:07.000] - Speaker 1
And I said, He's very reclusive, very private, but he's going to know who you are and respect you. So why don't you call him? So he called him. And then a few months later, Eero says, I'm changing my vision. I want it to be Eric's story chasing his father's death, you chasing your thing, and I'm going to intermingle them. And I'm like, Eero, this might be the only telling of all of my years of work at that point, 15 years or whatever. I go, I can't let you do that. I have to be the subject. And I know that's grandiose, but I can't share with another guy's story. It's not what I signed up for. And luckily, Sloan had crafted this structured contract where right before they green-lidded it at Netflix, I could pull out if I didn't like where it was going. And it all was furious. But then Wormwood came out of that.

[02:15:56.370] - Speaker 2
And Wormwood was incredible.

[02:15:58.580] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Too long. It should have been a little shorter, but I think he had to fill in the space. Eric's story is amazing. And he spent three times as long as I did researching, and he's still doing it. And I'm still very good friends.

[02:16:12.280] - Speaker 2
And it's more personal.

[02:16:13.870] - Speaker 1
Very much more. I mean, it's his hole. He lives in the house that his father disappeared from.Unbelievable.

[02:16:19.870] - Speaker 2
Story.he.

[02:16:20.430] - Speaker 1
Still lives there. It's tragic. But they did warm wood. It was great. And then when the Amazon deal ended in 2021 or or something. I happened to listen to Erl on a podcast with his son Hamilton. Hamilton was at my bungalow when Erl shot me there in Venice in 2014. Erl had put 12 cameras in the bungalow, on the ceiling, hidden everywhere, and everything was remotely controlled from another bungalow that happened to be empty. His team took it over, and it looked like a NASA command center. There was just Erl and I in my bungalow, and then one woman who was there to pull lens on one big camera. I found out later she was really there because I actually knew her previously through a friend, and they knew how anxious I was, and they knew she could call me. She was there to be my comfort blanket.Oh, nice. Kelly Simpson. She was great. And she was an assistant DP. So Hamilton brings it up in the podcast, and he goes, The one thing I can't believe is we're never going to see that footage you shot. And I said, Stop right now. He goes, Legally, I'm not I'm not even allowed to talk about it.

[02:17:31.850] - Speaker 1
And Hamilton was like, well, if we don't name the person or what he was doing, he goes, I just want to talk about what you did to that bungalow that you were shooting in. And I said, that is the best footage I've ever shot in my career. And this is like 2021, which is a lot of films. And he goes, and to think that that's going to be in my vault and never seen by anyone is heartbreaking to me. So then Hamilton and he talked about how they set things up without revealing me. So I emailed him the next day And I said, I heard you on Hamilton's podcast, Darryl. Just so you know, I don't think there was an NDA. I talk about it working with you to everyone. That's like, that gets me caché. And if you're still interested, believe it or not, it's available again because Amazon pulled the plug on the scripted. He called me within an hour. I couldn't believe it. Anyway, he said, I was so angry at you. And I go, I was just as pissed off. And we had that. So long story short, now he's doing a documentary film, not a series.

[02:18:29.780] - Speaker 1
And this is getting into the mechanics and the business. But for whatever reason, he'll tell why they didn't want to do a series. They only wanted to do a feature. So he's condensing my book in the 90 minutes. And he's shooting. He's great at what he does. I've seen a few cuts. I'm sure it'll be great.

[02:18:45.550] - Speaker 2
It'll just be some aspect of the book. So you can't do it in 90 minutes.

[02:18:50.630] - Speaker 1
Yeah. So I'm supposed to see, I think... I've never seen the whole thing. I've seen the first two-thirds.

[02:18:56.460] - Speaker 2
How was it?

[02:18:57.740] - Speaker 1
He's so good at what he does. Yeah, yeah, yeah. And my fear was he's going to make me look either mentally ill. No. Yes. He's known for making people look nuts because we are nuts. But no, he treated me and my reporting and my material with respect. So that fear was out of the way. I'm just frustrated because I feel like some of it's glossed over. Not me, but the information we're trying to impart.

[02:19:21.630] - Speaker 2
But you have 90 minutes. You have to-I know.90.

[02:19:24.290] - Speaker 1
Minutes, you have to gloss it. And I'm going to see. So I think this week, I'm supposed to get the next cut with the ending. Great. Then they have to turn in a final cut in May, I was told.So.

[02:19:34.610] - Speaker 2
When would it air?In.

[02:19:35.700] - Speaker 1
The fall.

[02:19:36.750] - Speaker 2
Amazing.

[02:19:37.550] - Speaker 1
I don't know what the fall is. Is that September, October?

[02:19:39.880] - Speaker 2
Is it going to be called Chaos or we don't know?

[02:19:42.070] - Speaker 1
That's the working title. The working title is Chaos. Who knows? But it's me blah, blah, blah. So he used a lot of the footage he shot in 2014. And then he had me come out to Boston, where he's based, and he rented this old school on the Coast, like an hour That's a famous location. There's a movie called Coda that won an Oscar for Best Picture about five years ago. And half of the movie takes place in this abandoned school. They make it. So he did all of his haunting arrow setups. Well, I have cameras way up in the ceiling. It'll zoom down to me.Wow. And he has all kinds of weird, I won't spoil it, weird effects.I.

[02:20:22.900] - Speaker 2
Can't wait to see that.He's.

[02:20:23.930] - Speaker 1
Good at what he does.Yeah..

[02:20:25.750] - Speaker 2
What do we know about Tex Watson's statement to the police?

[02:20:29.150] - Speaker 1
The tapes. These are audio tapes that are the first recorded version of how the murders occurred and why. Tex Watson was tape recorded by his lawyer in Texas. He turned himself in to the sheriff, who was his mother's cousin. The sheriff called the family lawyer, and this was before he was charged. They were looking for him, and it was before manson and the family had been announced. It was the day after Thanksgiving, '69. '99. So tech does stand out. They were looking for him. They found out he was in McKinney, this little town. So they called the sheriff. He said, I'll find him and you can come question him or I'll see what happens. So he called up Tex, and text was brought in by his mother and father. He'd been home for about a month. And Bill Boyd said, What do you have to do with a murder? They wouldn't even tell me what the murder was. And he said, I don't know what they're talking about. I have nothing to do. It's crazy. And he said, Okay, Charles. His name was Charles. He said, Charles, I'm going to let you sit here for a half hour.

[02:21:35.550] - Speaker 1
I'm going to go out with your parents, get lunch or coffee, and then I'll come back. And if that's your story, that's what we'll tell them. But you might want to rethink it because if you are responsible for anything, you need to tell me now. I'll be your lawyer. It'll be confidential, and I'll protect you. So he came back. And this is a story Bill Boyd told me on tape in 2000.Who told you the story?The lawyer in on tape. He said to me, he goes, So I go back and I go, Charles, are you still sticking to that story? He goes, Well, no. He goes, They're coming to talk to me about the murder of an actress, Sharon Tate. And Bill Boyd said, Well, I know about that case. He goes, Well, I killed her. And then Bill said, Will you tell me the whole story? And he said, As long as it's protected. So he took out a cassette recorder and he taped him. He told me for 20 hours, over two or three days. The detectives came. He wouldn't admit to anything. They couldn't take him out of custody because Bill Boyd wouldn't allow them.

[02:22:34.310] - Speaker 1
So that was a prolonged, I think, almost nine-month-long process to extradite him back. But that tape recording is the first account of how and why the murders happened before anything was published, before they got the next account from Susan Atkins, which was compromised, which I won't get into because I could take another half.

[02:22:55.430] - Speaker 2
But just tell me why it was compromised. I don't know.

[02:22:57.210] - Speaker 1
So she had a public defender. She had beenin charge with the murder of Gary Himman, who was killed a week before Tate La Bianca, a musician and student in Topanga Canyon. She killed him with Mary Bruner and Bobby Bosele. So she had been arrested in charge for that. While she was in her jail cell, she started bragging about being involved in the tape murders. One or two of her jail cells called up, reported her to the police. The police went in and questioned the cellmates. They said they testified to it. So they were going to charge her with tape murders. But she had a public defender named Jerome Condon, and they had a meeting, and I found this out when I got access to files that hadn't been reported before. The DA's office had a meeting saying, We've got to get somebody on our side to represent her. So they had her court-appointed attorney illegally removed from the case at her next arraignment in Hinman, and they replaced him with a former Deputy DA who had just gone into private defense practice that year named Dick Cabrero and his partner, Paul Caruso. She was never told why.

[02:24:10.500] - Speaker 1
I was able to interview Condon and his brother, who was his partner, and they both said, We were stunned. We went to her arraignment, and the judge announces that we're being taken off the case. They gave us no reason. We could have fought for it. Both of our wives said, We don't want you involved with this because they were starting to whisper that she might be charged with Tate. And he said, It's my biggest regret is that I didn't fight for that girl. So I found minutes to the meeting, which was completely improper, where the Deputy DA to Eval Younger, a guy named David Fitt, said, I can get to Clinco, the judge in that case, will have Condon removed and replaced with Caballero. The judge isn't allowed to do any of this, and nothing can be done without Condon finding out. So they did it behind the scenes. So from that day forward, she She started telling a story scripted by the DA's office for her. She got a deal, which was they weren't going to execute her if she plagued guilty. She got life in prison. They knew that she would never stay on their side.

[02:25:12.700] - Speaker 1
They just needed her grand jury testimony because they couldn't... It was hard to indict manson since he wasn't at the scene of the murders. They needed her to talk about him ordering it. She later said, Everything I said was scripted by the DA. She went back to manson, ended up getting the death penalty like all of them. All the death penalties were commuted when the state's supreme court ruled death penalty.

[02:25:36.060] - Speaker 2
How often is someone associated with a murder, but not at the scene and not a stab or a shooter?

[02:25:43.650] - Speaker 1
Not too often. And that's what... I mean, the whole helter-skelter really is about Vince having to prove that manson had ordered these murders, that he was guilty of conspiracy without him being at the scene of the tape murder.

[02:25:58.400] - Speaker 2
Has anyone ever been charged with conspiracy to commit murder that goes to jail for life?

[02:26:04.890] - Speaker 1
Gosh, that's a good question. I feel like now I'm going to look it up when I get home.

[02:26:09.690] - Speaker 2
Okay, I'm curious.

[02:26:10.660] - Speaker 1
Actually, why didn't I think of that when I was writing the book? Because if nobody had, that would have been important. I know it can't be a lot.

[02:26:17.930] - Speaker 2
Yeah, it can't be. It just seems so wild.

[02:26:21.700] - Speaker 1
Well, I'm now thinking about that teenager who was convicted of murder for getting a guy to kill himself on the phone. She Persuaded him to commit suicide. I don't know about that. It became a great movie. I know the guy who wrote the New York Times magazine article. Not really a conspiracy, but she got second-degree murder for telling this guy he had to kill himself because he was a nothing and his family hated him. The guy was messed up and he did it, but she didn't physically kill him. But I have to look that up, Rick. That's a good question.

[02:26:52.320] - Speaker 2
Was the manson trial filmed?

[02:26:55.120] - Speaker 1
No, no cameras in the courtroom. Not till OJ. Yeah, no. But the courtroom artists were there every day, and they were all acting up. Manson carved an X on his forehead. The girls did it the next day. They shaved their heads. Manson lunged at the judge at one point with a pen to try to stab him.

[02:27:15.610] - Speaker 2
Have you seen all of the unedited Manson interviews, Tom Snyder, Heraldo?

[02:27:21.650] - Speaker 1
No. I mean, maybe the first year, I watched a bunch of them because I interviewed him, and I needed to see.

[02:27:27.970] - Speaker 2
How did you interview him? I don't know this.

[02:27:29.980] - Speaker 1
Again, one of the most frustrating parts of all this. So I reached out to... He's a handler outside a hat. He's dead. And he had a follower named gray Wolf, who was outside the prison walls, and he would follow manson because he went through three or four different prisons, and he would handle all of mansion's correspondence, money.

[02:27:51.690] - Speaker 2
So he would go to the visiting hours?

[02:27:54.300] - Speaker 1
Yeah, and share information. I see. He was like his manager. And for years. So In 2000, when I got the assignment, I knew I had to interview him, and I found out that that was the way he had to go through Greybeard. So I actually wrote mansion a letter.

[02:28:08.670] - Speaker 2
Would the prison tell you you have to go through Greybeard?

[02:28:10.870] - Speaker 1
No, no. Actually, I'm revising that. I didn't know that. I sent a letter to Manson. Manson gave it to Greybeard, or maybe Greybeard got it first, and he contacted me, and he wanted money, and I said, I can't pay a subject, but I've got a lot of new information, and I tantalized him with some stuff. Nothing that exonerated manson, but also implicated. So he got curious. He persuaded Manson to do it. He goes, But the thing is, you can't see him in person because he's in the hole. He's in solitary because he always gets in trouble. So when you're in the hole, you're allowed out one night a week to make phone calls. So they set it up for me to talk to him on the phone. Now, I knew that just seeing those interviews you talked about Tom Snyder, Heraldo, however many, even face to face, it's hard to get him to stay straight and answer. But I thought on the phone, it's going to be impossible. But I got to try. So I had three phone calls with him, and he played the same games he did with them. I think the first or second call, I got angry at him.

[02:29:12.500] - Speaker 1
He had a guy inside called Pin cushion. It was his inside shadow guy who protected him. And he was called Pin cushion because he was stabbed so many times. So Manson would get upset with me. Pin cushion would grab the phone and say, You can't talk to the old man like that. I don't really can. You're pissing him off. Show in some respect. I said, I'm just asking him questions. So at one point, gray Wolf said to me in between some of these calls when Manson stopped talking to me, he said, You got to understand why he's so pissed. I said, I'm not asking anything that implicates him. I'm just asking about Melcher and stuff like that. So he goes, here, listen to the audio of him talking to me about you. So gray Wolf would always be patched into our call. So manson's inside, I'm outside, gray Wolf's outside. And after I got off, Manson was complaining him about me. But when he talked to gray Wolf, he's like, this O'Neill guy, I can tell he's really done his research and his reporting, but I don't want to talk about A, B. I said, Wolf, he sounds like he could be a paralegal.

[02:30:14.860] - Speaker 1
He sounds coherent. Why don't I get that, Charlie? I get crazy, Charlie. And you're just showing him now he's playing a part. And Wolf's like, I shouldn't have played you that tape. But anyway. That's amazing. I got one more call with him, and then I I didn't get anything I thought that was usable. And then about seven or eight years later, I'd gone on a road trip for eight months where I flushed out a lot of Manson family members who had never been approached before. I think maybe eight or nine. And I think only one or two talked to me. The others chased me off their properties, threatened me. He found out, Manson found out I was doing that. And I came back from that trip and I called gray Wolf and I said, Greg, I'd love to get another shot at Charlie. He called back and he left the message on my answering machine. He goes, Oh, Tom, I can arrange that. He goes, The old man, he liked you in the end. And the good news is you can come see him because he's not in the hole. But then an hour later, I get another message from Wolf saying, Never call me again.

[02:31:16.300] - Speaker 1
He goes, You have no idea how pissed off the old man. So he had reached out to Charlie. They canceled it.

[02:31:22.990] - Speaker 2
Have you met any of Manson's children?

[02:31:25.900] - Speaker 1
I don't think I've met any face to face. So Mary Bruner's son, the one we were talking about earlier, who got fostered by Roger Smith and his wife, Michael, formerly Michael Valentine, and then Poover, was his name the last couple of years on the ranch, reached out to me when my book came out, and he's working on a memoir and just a really nice guy. His mother did end up going to prison, not for the murder she participated in, which was Gary Hiemann, but for trying to break manson out of jail Before he went to prison, they did an armed hold up, her and about three or four other members in Lake 71, I think, and Hawthorn, of a sporting goods store. And there was a shootout. So she went to prison for that. And Michael was actually sent to his grandparents when she was arrested the first time, when she was a suspect in Tate La Bianca and Hinman. So he was raised by his grandparents in Wisconsin, and now he's a carpenter contractor, single dad. And I talked to him on the phone. One of the gentlest, sweetest guys in the world. He was born in, I think, '67.

[02:32:37.680] - Speaker 1
So I don't know how old that is. But he knows I would give my left not to interview his mother. She's never given an interview since she got out of prison. She hasn't given an interview probably since she was being tried in '70. And I said, I'm not going to push that. I go, But if she ever decides to I talk to someone, I go, And here's another thing. There's just a couple of questions if you could ask her this, and he's done it for me. So he's the only one, I think. Oh, no, there's another guy who lives out here, and he's been able to prove it by DNA. He just found out about three or four years ago, he was manson's biological son from late '50s. I told you, Manson was out in LA in '58, '59, and he was fathered by Manson. And now there's a court battle for Manson's rights and remains. Everything that Manson collected in prison for 50 years is in storage in possession of the courts. Whoever gets that can sell it to all the crazy collectors for lots and lots of money. Some of his music rights, I think, are valuable.

[02:33:51.360] - Speaker 1
So there's two of his friends who are claiming, one has a will that manson said, that he says manson's sign that's being disputed David, another one, has some evidence that manson was leaving his estate to him. There's another fraudulent son who definitely isn't his son, but who says he actually is his grandson. And then Michael. So there's five. And now this new guy, there's five or six people. This is an ongoing case that's been going on for about three or four years where they're all fighting for possession of manson's stuff.

[02:34:22.570] - Speaker 2
Did you ever speak to Kurt Gentry?

[02:34:25.170] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[02:34:25.920] - Speaker 2
Tell me about that.

[02:34:27.140] - Speaker 1
So Kurt Gentry was Vince's co-author for Helter Skelter. Vince never worked with the same co-author twice. He wrote about eight or nine books. All his true crime books had a co-author, which I'm not discounting. I mean, Dan, mine saved my life. But I talked to two or three of them, one of them who sued Vince. None of them liked him. Kurt said it ended amicably, but then started telling Kurt not to talk to me. So the last time I talked to Kurt about... He was very generous on the phone with me a couple of times with information. But within the same year, I called him and he said, I know what you're doing now. He goes, Don't call me again. I said, Whatever Vince is telling you, you got to hear me out. And he just hung up on me. So he died early 2000s And five years ago, I wanted to get his files because I knew he had a lot. He told me he had files. So he had stuff in storage. He had no kids, but he left it to a sister who left it to a kid. It all went to auction because it wasn't claimed, and I couldn't trace it.

[02:35:32.800] - Speaker 1
So who knows where it ended up.

[02:35:35.370] - Speaker 2
You want to tell me about what it was like driving a horse in Central Park? How long did you do it for?

[02:35:40.640] - Speaker 1
I thought it was going to be a summer job. It turned into eight years off and on. And that's when I started getting published is I would be up there on slow nights. I mostly work nights, and I would just bring a whole bunch of magazines to read. And I thought, I can do this. And I had never studied journalism. I finished NYU And it was great because I transferred to NYU, so I was only there two years at that point. But I started driving the carriage, and I'd work from five or six at night till three in the morning, four in the morning. And at that point, a carriage could go anywhere in the city. A car could go. Really? And about 70 % of the drivers were immigrants, predominantly Irish, then Italian, then Polish. And they were just all characters. I only did it full-time for a year, but for the next seven years, I would do seasonal. Like the prom season was big, Christmas was big, the beginning of fall was big, the beginning of spring. So I do it two or three months at a time. And it really showed me a side of New York I don't think I ever would have seen because you're out there in Times Square, Central Park.

[02:36:48.030] - Speaker 1
I go down to the village with the horse three or four in the morning, and you're seeing that whole other nightly world at one point.

[02:36:55.730] - Speaker 2
And people are delighted by the horse and buggy. People like seeing it.

[02:36:59.750] - Speaker 1
And I was always conflicted about the horses. My stable had, I think, the largest stable of horses. And he loved the horses more. The owner loved the horses more than he liked his drivers. And he told us that. He goes, I don't care what happens to you fuckers, but don't let one of my horses get hurt. But I still had conflicted feelings about doing it. But I really romantically, I have amazing stories from that period of stuff that either I experienced as a driver or witnessed. There was a woman who was a great screenwriter named Jay Presson-Allen who wanted to do a TV series based on me driving the carriage. It got close, and then she got interested in something else. She put it on a shelf, and it It's not going to ever happen, but I have all of the stuff we wrote together. It's one of those things I have in a drawer that I think when I want to get away from the subject, I got to do either a carriage, a memoir, or some film or something.
