[00:00:06.940] - Speaker 4
Tétragrammitan. Tétragrammitan. Tétragrammitan. Tétragrammitan. Tétragrammitan. Tétragrammitan. Tétragrammitan. Tétragrammitan. Tétragrammitan.

[00:00:21.980] - Speaker 1
When I go back to the beginning and I think about starting a band and saying, Well, I don't have to make every decision, but I want to make these decisions. I also recognize that there were times when I had offers to be in other bands, and I just realized, No, because there's a certain thing that I want to do. And so, of course, I've always... It's never been hard to understand why people might want to do things outside of the band. How could I possibly judge that? Especially, I have such a unique relationship to singing words that I wrote. I didn't write every single word in Vampire Week and I didn't write every single song, but a high enough percentage that I can say that's my specific relationship is singing words that I wrote. I also recognize that that might not be for everybody. It's hard for me to imagine a career in music if that's not the primary mode I have. On a handful of occasions, I've worked with other artists or I have a couple of credits as a song songwriter or producer or something. But I always come back to, I have this story that I'm telling through words, and it's flexible enough that there can be huge contributions from other people.

[00:01:43.410] - Speaker 2
Do you think of it as a personal thing that is meaningful to you, or do you think there's some connection between your voice and lyrics you wrote that has a different power? Do you think you could sing someone else's words and have the vocal be as good? Or is it not about that?

[00:02:07.800] - Speaker 1
I can sing other people's words and feel a deep connection to it. I think I have a unique voice. I just don't know if my voice is strong enough that it demands the world hearing my take on it in the way that sometimes a truly great singer who so much control over their voice, hearing their interpretation of a song is very special. I wouldn't say that. But lately, we've been busting out this little country medley that we've been doing. And there's one part, and it's fun. It's mostly a country shelf. But there's one part we go into, Sin City by the Flying Burrito Brothers. And I love singing it because I actually feel so connected to it. And I love the words, and I love trying to do my best. But again, there's no part... But that's a live thing. There's no part of me that's like-How did you pick it? I mean, as with so many things in Vampire Weekend, it started as a joke because that song is... I actually haven't researched it enough, but I assume it's a critique of LA and maybe not just show biz culture, but businessy culture. So I think it just started having a laugh with the guys about, imagine next time we play the Hollywood Bowl, if just out of nowhere, we get very serious and say, We have something to tell you, Sin City, which part of me, I do believe in my heart, is an important message.

[00:03:35.040] - Speaker 1
Then a part of me is also just like, How surprising and weird would that be to start getting a little fire and brimstone at the Hollywood Bowl? Then we built this whole country medley where we were taking one of our songs, Married in a Gold Rush, which is using some classic country metaphors about gold, gold rushes, minds. And then so I started thinking about songs that had to do gold. And so then naturally this fit because in our little medley, we talk about after we go into all the gold in California, and then there's a little bit where we talk about, let's say you do come to California and you win this game and you get yourself a house in the hills and get yourself a nice office on the 31st floor. Do you really think that'll keep out the Lord's Burning Rain? And then we go into it. So on the one hand, there's the fun of just linking all these songs with this classic American imagery of gold and mines. But then, of course, there's the religious angle. If for you, Satan is a malevolent force who's always lying in wait to take you down.

[00:04:43.200] - Speaker 1
But the idea of that a golden door won't keep out the Lord's burning rain, whether you look at that through a religious lens or just the idea that nobody is protected from suffering in this life and the idea that you can prevent that suffering through pure materialism is absurd. No matter what, there is something moving to me about that song.

[00:05:10.150] - Speaker 2
That's on the fourth album.

[00:05:12.030] - Speaker 1
Yeah, Married in Gold Rushes. Yeah.

[00:05:14.150] - Speaker 2
Going into that one, what was different. Fourth album.

[00:05:19.150] - Speaker 1
I'd already had this huge feeling of change, an era ending, the early days being over, my 20s being over. First, I took a lot of time off. Also, I really did question, as you have to every now and then, Do I really want to be doing music forever? We did it. I really thought we'd gone about, at least in New York, we'd gone from campus parties to an arena. Okay, what's next? Giant Stadium, which is now called MetLife Stadium, but it's hard for me to say. I grew up with Giant Stadium. We're not going to go to Giant Stadium. So in some ways, I was like, yeah, so we did that. So to to continue would really require something beyond just the fuel of ambition, the fuel of bigger and better. I naturally want to take some time off and really think, what do I want to do? What do I have to say as a songwriter? What would the next phase of Vampar Weekend potentially look like? I already had songs that I wanted to work on, so it wasn't dire in the sense of, I have no idea. I was like, No, I'd already been working on Harmony Hall for a while.

[00:06:33.350] - Speaker 1
I knew that that could be an important song for the next record. But I also had this sense of, Well, what comes next? Then I realized, You know what comes next after your dark, serious, critically acclaimed third album is Have Some Fun Again, a big open double album. That didn't mean that I didn't have deep, intense sentiments in my soul that I wanted to get out. But I also realized, No, It's Time for our double album. Probably the one I thought of the most of that period was Springsteen's The River. I think the thing that I just kept thinking about with The River was like, which he made after darkness on the Edge of Town which I was like, Oh, maybe Modern Vampire is our darkness on the Edge of Town. The thing I loved about The River, I was like, I just love the fact that there's the song The River, which is intense and moving, and there's those songs like Stolen Car and stuff that are intense. That are the seeds of Nebraska. But then there's songs like Ramrod and Little Girl, I Want to Marry You and Sherry darling. I was just like, You know what?

[00:07:44.390] - Speaker 1
I had to zoom out again and say, Is Modern Vampires the sound that Vampire Weekend has been heading for? Is the early work Juvenalia? This is like, Okay, now we understand. I realized, No, Modern Vampires is a very important album, but it's one aspect of our identity. My vision of Vampire Weekend is not a chart where we start at fun simplicity and every album get more serious and less fun and less sense of humor. Of course not. That's not me. That's not the DNA of the band. There's something about the river and that idea of the profound next to the mundane and even the smart next to the stupid that was compelling to me, and that got me more excited than ever to make an album that was long and that had, for whatever reason, I felt like we had to have bare minimum 17 tracks to really feel like a double album. There was times I was thinking, 20, 22, but ultimately, I capped it at 18. It felt right. Then I started working more closely with Ariel and some stuff, and I started to really get in the groove with him, and we started to establish more of our unique rapport were just the two of us.

[00:09:02.950] - Speaker 1
Then suddenly, the fun started to come back. It took a minute, too, because I was like, This is going to be our first... As much as some people might think Modern Vampires was our first grown-up album because it was our first serious album, to me, and this is no knock on that album, it's some of our most important and best work. It's still the seriousness of youth. It's very much a 20 somethings version of seriousness. And so it was exciting to me to start to imagine not like, oh, boy, the era we were part of is over. I have people all the time telling me, dude, rock is so dead. It's so played out. People said, bands are played out. People were delighted in that. I also needed a couple of years to realize, Wait a second. I love that shit. I love working in a dead medium. I love when people say something is uncool and played out. So it was good to have that time off to get excited again and be like, Right, this This vampire weekend era can have genre experimentation, can have simplicity. And maybe also, I finally, after Modernampires, I also started to care less about, What if there's some low-hanging fruit for people to call it dumb or slight or whatever.

[00:10:16.500] - Speaker 1
For the first time in my life, I was like, Oh, good.

[00:10:18.620] - Speaker 2
What would be a good song that you think would be a representative song of it?

[00:10:24.760] - Speaker 1
I'd be tempted to say Harmony Hall, but in some ways, the song that sums up what I'm talking about the most is probably this life because that song, to me, it embodies the duality I was just talking about.

[00:10:38.870] - Speaker 2
You want to play a little bit?

[00:10:40.290] - Speaker 1
Well, sure. To me, the opening line is just one of those lines. There's a part of me that wanted to get a little simpler. To me, like Steph is the epitome of, I guess, my lyrical approach that's impressionistic and my want to be rapper side using weird images and jamming stuff together, but still trying to pull real meaning out of it.

[00:11:15.890] - Speaker 3
And then when I wrote, I had this real feeling I was like, all right, somebody who loves Stepp might not immediately think that's a masterpiece, but I was like, this is the other side of the coin because I'm, I don't know.

[00:11:39.970] - Speaker 1
Maybe I'm not quite as pretentious as some people think I am. It was really sad to me. I mean, you'll appreciate this. But one time, early days, we covered the Tom Petty song, Walls. I love that whole era. I love wildflowers and all that stuff. So Walls, I remember we performed it, it's some weird little thing at Joe's Pub. And I remember at the time, I was just so into that song. Because you got a heart so big. You Got A Heart So Big, You Could Crush This Town, I can't hold on forever. Even walls. Fall down or come down? Fall down. And I remember, whatever, this is probably our first or second album, maybe people knew us for Who Gives a fuck about an Oxford Com, or they thought of us as the Columbia kids. And either before or after the song, I said, This is a Tom Petty song called Walls. You might remember it. It was on movie soundtrack. And I said, The lyrics are so good. And I just remember, then later I saw somebody had written it up for a blog, and they wrote something like, And then Esra, with a smirk, dismissively said, as if I had said, Oh, and Walls, these lyrics are so good.

[00:12:50.900] - Speaker 1
I swear to you. I said, These lyrics are so good. They saw us in a certain way, so they heard what they wanted to hear. And first of all, I don't need to tell you that the The idea of dissing Tom Petty as a lyracist is horrific to me. Especially at that time, you can imagine I was thinking like, All right, cool. Oxford comma, whatever. These lyrics reflect my sensibility, but I should be so lucky that one day I can say something as simple but meaningful as I can't hold on forever, even walls fall down. Because also, I've always been interested in the fact that, especially with music, but really with everything, simple and complex, I don't even like using these words, but smart and dumb, it's so obviously a yin-yen. The smartest people, they let the dumb remain. I've always been obsessed with the fact that I've known so many dumb smart guys, and I've known so many smart, dumb guys.

[00:13:50.130] - Speaker 2
The idea that- It's the idea of high and low together is always interesting.

[00:13:55.220] - Speaker 1
Totally. Yeah, exactly. I mean, arguably, that's what it's all about. So there was something about, Baby, I know pain is as natural as the rain. I just thought it didn't rain in California. Because even the character who's saying that is a little dumb. Of course, it doesn't rain in California.

[00:14:10.240] - Speaker 2
It's such a great line.

[00:14:12.180] - Speaker 1
And it's to me that it minimizes that album.

[00:14:14.220] - Speaker 2
It didn't use to rain in California. Something's changing. Yeah.

[00:14:17.820] - Speaker 1
Ever since that song, it started raining more. But I know that there's that old song, It Never Rains in Southern California.

[00:14:25.860] - Speaker 2
But even-It's a great song, by the way, that song.

[00:14:28.620] - Speaker 1
I need to revisit that. I know the title better than I know the song itself. I'll play for you.

[00:14:32.550] - Speaker 2
It's such a good song.

[00:14:34.360] - Speaker 1
That's Albert Hammond Senior, right? Yeah.

[00:14:52.520] - Speaker 3
Got on board a Westbound 747. Didn't think before deciding what to do.

[00:15:08.950] - Speaker 4
All that talk of opportunities, TV breaks and movies, rang true, sure and true.

[00:15:26.520] - Speaker 3
Seems it never rains in Southern California.

[00:15:34.750] - Speaker 4
Seems I've often heard that talk before. It never rains in California, but girl, don't they warn you? It bore, man, it bore.

[00:15:57.310] - Speaker 3
It never rains in California, but girl, don't they warn you? It bore, man, it bore.

[00:16:00.460] - Speaker 1
Itbeautiful song. Yeah, excellent. Even like we were talking about before, writing a song that uses a gold rush as a metaphor for something emotional or uses an empty mind as a metaphor for something. Then you hear a song talking about raining versus not raining, and what does that mean? Even that is a different approach to songwriting that I wanted to tap into, where a song like Step, Obviously, you don't write a song like that unless you really want to do your own thing. I mean, obviously, it's very inspired, indebted to the originators. But who gives a fuck about an extra comment? That's where you want to say, Well, what makes me different than my peers? And then other times, you realize that you want to tap into the shared imagery of the history of songwriting, and that even just to do my little spin on a California Rain metaphor felt fresh and exciting to me in a way that expensive words didn't at that time. Yeah.

[00:17:06.750] - Speaker 2
It also is like it's playing in a timeless tradition. So what you're writing is up against the greatest songs of all time versus quirky cool lyrics that speak to today.

[00:17:21.600] - Speaker 1
Right.

[00:17:22.200] - Speaker 2
Yeah. It's a different thing.

[00:17:24.350] - Speaker 1
Yeah. It's such a funny paradox because one type of listener might hear the simplicity of that and feel like it's a step down, whereas I love the way that you put it. It's a step up to the big league is more how I feel. It's what Leonard Cohen calls the Tower of Song, which to even, again, I'm not trying to compete with the goats, but even just to operate in that tradition is-It's daunting.

[00:17:52.680] - Speaker 2
Yeah, right. It's daunting. It's big.

[00:17:55.340] - Speaker 1
Yeah. No, and that's probably why on that song, the pre-chorus comes from M'Conen.

[00:18:02.330] - Speaker 3
You've been cheating on, cheating on me. I've been cheating on, cheating on you. You've been cheating on me. But I've been cheating through.

[00:18:11.970] - Speaker 1
I changed it at the end, but he had this great early song called Tonight, where he said, You've been cheating on, cheating on me. I've been cheating on, cheating on you. Now, with time, it feels normal. But even in the vampire week in universe, up till that point, even the relationship songs were so shrouded in oblique imagery that even to use the word cheating felt bold to me.It was out of the vocabulary of vampire weekend.Totally. I was very grateful to Mâcone, and of course, he's a songwriter on this because hearing him say it, I was like, first of all, I was like, wow, it's like a Shakespearean comedy. You've been cheating on me? Guess what? I've been cheating on you. Just the human absurdity of we're both playing each other. But hold on, maybe I'm the one who's been cheating through this whole life.

[00:19:05.460] - Speaker 2
The cheating through this whole life, when you get to it. Can you sing that part, the pre-chorus into the chorus?

[00:19:12.840] - Speaker 3
You've been cheating on, cheating on me. I've been cheating on, cheating on you. You've been cheating on me. But I've been cheating through this life. And all it's suffering. Oh, Christ.

[00:19:39.200] - Speaker 1
Am I good for nothing?

[00:19:45.000] - Speaker 2
When you sing it, two things. One, I'm almost welling up with tears. And on the word, on when you say this life, just now, just like the first time you played it for me, I felt a chill up my spine. Because the setup is so casual and friendly, and then it turns into this like a metaphysical thing. It goes from the mundane physical world to, and this is a symptom of everything in my life. And it's heavy. Because it's funny. I the lines, it's funny. You've been cheating on me. I've been cheating on you. It's funny. Yeah, right.

[00:20:32.740] - Speaker 1
Yeah,.

[00:20:33.750] - Speaker 2
But then when the singer realizes, But I've been doing this my whole life. I'm cheating on life.

[00:20:39.080] - Speaker 1
It feels like a tremendous weight. Right. In some ways, it's also interesting, too, going through all these things with you because, of course, with every album, there's naturally the artistic tendency to want to push off or say, I did I don't want to do something else. I try to think about, well, what's the dialog between Modernampires and Father the Bright if we look at those songs? I think of when I talk about Modernampires as being some of the seriousness of youth, there's an esthetic sense of that. Even when I think about the characters and the worldview, there's a lot of talk about the external difficulties of life. There's so much death. And again, the way you think about death when you're young and you barely know anybody see who died, and you probably never thought about you dying, and you never had to comfort people dealing with death and all that heavy stuff. Of course, some people have, but I hadn't. And of course, that's one way of being where you're like, Wow, can't believe all this bad stuff is out there. But it's very much about the world delivering bad stuff to you. And boy, it feels unfair.

[00:21:53.020] - Speaker 1
I think there was also something as simple as that song is that I liked about a character rather than focusing on the bad things the universe delivers to them, focusing on the way maybe they've been cheating through life and maybe they've been ungrateful. Because also, I think that's the thing about that pre-chorus, as we go deep on it is to realize a lot of people, if they found out someone was cheating on them, they'd be very angry, even if they were cheating, too. That's human nature. I can't believe you would do that to me. Well, you did it to me, too. Well, that's different. That's the human nature. I love the idea of it's heading there. It's almost like, How dare you cheat on me? Then it's like, I'm going to drop the circumstances for a second and just think about my own relationship to it. In that sense, as we contrast these, I can really see how this song has flipped some of those feelings from the previous album.

[00:22:49.700] - Speaker 2
It's so good. It's so powerful. I love it. Also, is this in that window where you began your relationship?

[00:23:02.950] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Yeah, I guess it is.

[00:23:07.440] - Speaker 2
It's funny. After the third album and before the fourth album.

[00:23:09.680] - Speaker 1
Yeah, no, that's when we got together. It's funny because It always annoyed me a bit, and not everybody did this. Again, who cares? But at the time, it annoyed me a bit that because our son was born so soon before the release of this album, Father of the Bride, and maybe because Father's in the title, there was so much talk about fatherhood and family and how that must have impacted the album. Of course, as me as somebody who works on songs for years, sometimes decades, I just wanted to be like, Guys, not only do you not really know what it's like to be a dad until a few years in to having a kid? I didn't even have a kid when I wrote these songs. She wasn't even pregnant yet. There was some part of me that was this obsession with fatherhood, and maybe it's also because there's a dad rock influence on the album. Again, I can forgive everybody that they're allowed to have their own opinions. But it's funny. I kept being like, Guys, maybe I did it to myself. But I was like, Guys, there's no relationship to fatherhood in here. But there is a relationship to adulthood.

[00:24:19.470] - Speaker 2
I think that's the key. You said it. It's like the first three albums are, You Get Serious Through Young Eyes. And then the fourth album is the first one examining adulthood and taking into account, a father image is representative of adulthood.

[00:24:38.250] - Speaker 1
Yes, right. It really is. It's an archetype of adulthood. You might not know what it's like to take care of a child yet or the feelings that that has or whatever. But exactly, it's an archetype of adulthood. You were asking me about the relationship starting, and I think about some of the songs on that album. I totally think of it as a childless album, but I think of it as an adult album, and maybe there are aspects of an adult relationship. That song, This Life, also has the... It's simple, but... Baby, I know love Isn't what I thought it was 'cause I never known love like this before.

[00:25:21.180] - Speaker 3
And then that goes into the...

[00:25:24.020] - Speaker 1
Then there's an instrumental thing.

[00:25:25.870] - Speaker 3
You've been cheating on, cheating on me.

[00:25:28.260] - Speaker 1
I'm not saying I'm so Zen that If somebody was cheating on me all over town, then I'd be like, Hey, it's all good. I got to work on myself. But I like the idea that within that same song, you have somebody talking about, I don't know what real love was like, and also having this funny pivot about cheating, not letting the song sit in anger or judgment or victimization, and realizing maybe a tiny thing about what it means to be an actual adult and your relationship to other people.

[00:26:00.600] - Speaker 2
Also interesting about collaboration because the Cheating On, Cheating On Me started with Moconen. Yeah. And maybe that was more his experience, singing his experience. Your response to what you changed at the end is what made it the adult part. You're playing the adult character in the story. In the collaboration, you get to use this cool phrase that was written by a younger person about a younger experience. It's interesting.

[00:26:30.220] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I haven't thought about it that way, but I don't know if this is my favorite song on Father Bright necessarily. I think we purposefully kept it pretty simple. There's some pretty cool Ariel production moments in there, but there's a version of it that had that vampire weekend, unexpected genre contrast. There's a version that the groove was basically like reggaeton, like the. Then we had Greg Lee's shredding pedal steel over It was this reggaeton country song. It had more of that feeling that sometimes I hope people get from some of our music, which is like, I never heard those things paired together. It was really cool. I still somewhere on my phone, I have videos of just Greg on like beautiful country licks, pedal steel licks over reggae song. But we still made it more spare and stuff. I think it might not be the song on the album where we really I have a lot of fun with the production or the most interesting. And yet if I'm ever sitting at the piano or a guitar, I just do find… It's a song I like to come back to a lot. It's a beauty.

[00:27:41.980] - Speaker 1
I love it. Oh, thank you.

[00:27:44.380] - Speaker 2
And then what was it like touring? So the fourth album is the first time you're touring without Rostam in the group. And how did it feel? How was it different? What else changed?

[00:27:55.430] - Speaker 1
Yeah, a lot of things changed. I was becoming more of a deadhead at the time as my biggest influence was in some way my buddy Jake's Grateful Dead cover band. Because I remember in that funny period in the years after Modernampires, when I really felt a little bit like something had ended, a little bit disconnected from what was going on. I felt like I was starting to lose maybe something that I had some pride in, which was a real sense of what's cool or something. I felt a little bit uninspired. That was the first time I saw my buddy Jake's dead cover band, Richard Pictures, playing the 20 people at a little party. There was something special about seeing a cover band. My buddy Jake is an artist, a visual artist, so he's a painter. So just to see that true love of the game was so refreshing after having navigated the business. When we're starting to put together the live band, and I always see any change, of course, can be a huge opportunity. There was about... I knew one way or another that we weren't just going to replace Rostin with one dude.

[00:29:06.830] - Speaker 1
We could have just find somebody to cover some keyboard and guitar parts, but it just seemed like such a great opportunity to do something different. When I saw the classic '70s dead lineup, and I was spending a lot of time every night watching some old dead shows, and there's something about the two drummers, the Donna, the dedicated keyboardist, I was just like, this just looks so much more fun. Also, I needed something to get excited about because I didn't want to go back to that feeling I was describing of feeling a little bit like, what's the point of this on the Modern Vampars? Tour is the vibe off. It needed to be celebratory. It needed to be exciting. And we found the right people. And then suddenly, touring felt less like an obligation and more like something actually really special and fun. And then on top of that, we finally had enough material that we could switch up the setlist and let people take solos and do more covers and have a bit more fun night to night. And that's something that me, CT, and Bayo really came together on. Ct is a lifelong fish fan.

[00:30:16.280] - Speaker 1
He has roots in the jam world. Bayo has always had a great knack for making set lists and knowing how to run band practice and remembering all the parts. We could really come together and trying to treat the show more as a celebration. In that sense, it became the best touring experience because it just made touring feel different.

[00:30:41.580] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the feeling in the rehearsals before you did any shows with extended band. What did it feel like in rehearsal?

[00:30:49.720] - Speaker 1
It felt great because, like I said, there was always a duality and at times a tension between the fact that the Vampire Weekend is a band. Always remember that our My biggest song, Apunk, everybody contributed to. As much as I'm proud of my songbook as a songwriter, I didn't come up with Hey, Hey, Hey on Apunk. And truly, sometimes I think, What if we didn't have that? Who knows? Yeah, it's true. We've always had that duality where the band aspect is very important. But of course, I feel my voice as a songwriter and my freedom as a band leader is also important. There's times where that maybe made things feel unsettled. There's something about suddenly realizing, well, whatever I might do in the studio with Ariel, when I bring it to the practice room and I say to the guys, I have no idea how this should sound live, and suddenly everybody gets a chance to throw out some ideas and say, Wait, what if we went into this other song? Or, Wait, I have an idea. Then I started to realize the live and the studio side can be more linked than I thought, and even in exciting ways.

[00:31:57.240] - Speaker 1
For instance, I knew that the song Sunflower, which is this very simple, so jammy, rep. Sorry, I don't have a pick, but the… It's mixalidian, rep, jammy. But me and Ariel wanted to keep it short on the record, so it's like two and a half minutes or something. Then I realized, I love this rep. There's something I really like about this song, but when we just play the two and a half minute version live, it feels underwhelming or something. Then to present that to everybody Where can we take this? People are throwing out ideas and trying this and that. I said, What if we made it more like the dead? Then somebody else is like, I remember talking with CT because he's the jam aficionado. I was like, Okay, what would the dead version be? We're doing this light jam, and I was like, I don't like it. He was like, Oh, I think you want maybe more like '68 dead, where there's that psychedelic heaviness. Then from that, we started being like, No, what we want is an early Sabbath version. We did this Sabbath version live, and it just felt so good. That was a great proof of concept where it's like there is a dialog and a role that everybody plays, and it's very important, actually.

[00:33:11.340] - Speaker 1
The records feed the live show, and the live show feeds the records in its in a way. I think of those rehearsals as a special time where we were entering a new phase and one that turned out to be very positive.

[00:33:23.230] - Speaker 2
That's great. Did the touring of the fourth album impact the new album?

[00:33:30.130] - Speaker 1
In a sense, it did. I think the fourth album made me realize that the show can have a feeling of its own. There were times when I thought, I love our crunchy vibe now. Maybe we should get even crunchier on the next album. Then I realized, you know what? You can do whatever you want in your show. Yeah, it's cool to present your new material in a thoughtful way, but also you can just bust out a cover whenever you want. You can go to the city, If you want to do a country song, do it. In some ways, I had so much faith in the live show and the group of people that we were doing it with that I realized that will have a life of its own regardless of what this record sounds like. When I found myself being on the fifth album, being drawn to something gritty or noisy or whatever, I had total faith. I was like, This will fit into the live show because anything could fit into the live show. In some ways, my attitude towards all five albums has been exactly the same, whether I've been working with Rostem or Ariel or both of them, whether Chris and Chris are playing all over it, whether they're not.

[00:34:37.800] - Speaker 1
I've always had my attitude has more or less been the same. But I think going into this album, I think we developed a closeness on the Father of the Bride tour that just naturally led to us playing together more. There's songs on this album, on the fifth album, that is, that are very much me and Ariel in a room. But then there's songs that did find their groove in the practice room, too. So yeah, maybe it's a bit of a full circle thing.

[00:35:03.560] - Speaker 2
How would you describe what's different about the fifth album?

[00:35:08.750] - Speaker 1
As I've been doing press for it, and I'm not sure if I've nailed it, I've described it as being our noisiest and our hardest album. I mean, there is more distortion and feedback than ever before, but this is the album where I worried the least about singles. Some albums just have singles or just right apunk. It's just a good single, Oxford, comma. On the last album, This Life in Harmony Hall, as much as that album is all over the place, those are just real singles. They sum up the album. This one, I just stopped worrying about it quite as much because I felt a little bit like getting too old for that shit to worry about it. I don't know. I think me and Ariel really came together wanting to explore, for lack of a better word, like, hardness. Sometimes soft things are hard.

[00:35:57.940] - Speaker 2
How would you say, lyrically, it's different than fourth album?

[00:36:02.390] - Speaker 1
It's narrower. The fourth album being 18 songs, I wanted to have that slightly cookey, We're here, now we're here. Now we're talking about me. Now we're talking about this guy. Whereas this album, I felt like has more of a focused intensity. There's a back to New York feeling, at the very least as a setting or a home base or something. I also just think, like with every album, the worldview shifts a little bit, and it's been interesting. I think it's definitely our most spiritual album, which is a funny word. It can be triggering to some people.

[00:36:40.320] - Speaker 2
How would you describe that, your spiritual aspects of the album and your relationship to spirituality?

[00:36:48.200] - Speaker 1
To me, the simplest definition of spirituality is the belief that there is more to reality than the physical world, which when you think about it, is more or less what modern science says, too. The tension between the scientific worldview and the spiritual worldview has always been a little bit silly. I think when you dive into that and you really explore it, of course, that can be a source of great comfort to people. And as I've gotten older, I sometimes feel like it's the ultimate source of comfort, arguably the only real source of comfort. Then the next phase of the conversation gets tricky. Do you want to call the universe? Do you want to call it just a sophisticated psychological operation you perform on yourself? Or do you want to call it God?

[00:37:37.910] - Speaker 2
It's just labels.

[00:37:39.410] - Speaker 1
It's all labels. It's all labels. Exactly. And it's funny because back to Modernampires. At the time, I didn't know why I was drawn to religious imagery, but there's a song called Yahe, which obviously is a play on Yahweh, which is a name for God. But when I look at that song, it was obviously coming from a rational, materialist, atheistic place. I've always had respect for differing opinions, but I was definitely coming at it from an outsider of, Well, obviously, I don't believe in that. So if I was to talk to this concept called God, it's more or less saying I don't get it, but there obviously was a spiritual yearning. When I look at those lyrics now in rehearsal, I see them. It seems clear as day on these songs, like Everlasting Arms or Yaha, Maybe at that phase of my life, I almost had a disappointment because I felt so disconnected from whatever this thing is that we label sometimes, that I was almost disappointed. This is really all there is. When I think of this album in terms of spirituality, even if it doesn't wear it on its sleeve, there's a different type of engagement with...

[00:38:52.370] - Speaker 1
The word I like the best is reality. Sometimes in spiritual literature, it's called the ultimate reality, the supreme reality. But to me, that's the place where religious people and scientific people can come together. We're talking about what is the truth, the actual truth. I think this album engages with it in a different way. But of course, I see the connections between the albums and how it got here. It's funny because in some ways with this album, by worrying less about singles, I've tried not to get in the way and think about it less. I mean, you call it different things, but in your book, it stands out to me that you use the phrase source a lot, and this feeling that source has its own thing to say, and sometimes you can just let it speak. In a way, one funny aspect of it is that the album title comes from the fact that I saw a cool picture, and then my artistic sensibility said, Don't mess up this cool picture by throwing Vampire Weekend on it. Don't throw text on it. The only text on it a newspaper headline that was Only God was above us.

[00:40:03.880] - Speaker 1
I thought, That'll do. That's a cool phrase. Then, again, it's not because I thought I wanted to use those words or because my artistic sensibility chose those words or even that. I literally didn't even put those words in that order. But it is notable to me, and I only reflected on this when the album was done, that I was like, Oh, that's interesting to have. It's a big word to have in an album title. It's one I could not have pictured ever being a Vampire Weekend album title, including on Modern Vampars. There's something about that that, I don't know, feels meaningful.

[00:40:44.980] - Speaker 2
Was there always music playing in your house when you were growing up?

[00:40:48.130] - Speaker 1
There was always music around. It's something I've been thinking about now having a family of my own because I can tell that we play music in our house less less than a lot of people. Because I'm a musician and also my wife has a lot of music in her family, people always say, Oh, do you play music around the house? All the time? Does your son like music? We encourage him to play music. But we don't actually play a lot ambiently. I think that's true in the house I grew up in as well, that my parents weren't always just having tunes going. It was a quiet house. But I think the flip side of that is when one of my parents took me aside to play me a piece of music or put a record on, it felt very specific. I still have very specific memories of both of my parents saying something about music they liked because it wasn't always there. So we'd focus up.

[00:41:44.810] - Speaker 2
Can you remember any examples from either of them of what they played you and why they liked it?

[00:41:50.670] - Speaker 1
I remember my dad highlighting the fact that Ray Davies from the Kinks was a very good songwriter, and I remember him playing me Waterloo Sunset on some like, You want to hear a good song? This guy's a real songwriter. That was meaningful to me. He'd sometimes play old blues songs, and I don't want to play classical pieces.

[00:42:13.350] - Speaker 2
Do you think there was an age when it shifted? Was there a time when you were young where that would happen, where your father would play you a piece of music and your response would be, What he's saying is gospel, and I'm learning from him? Yeah. Did there come a time where he would play you something and you're like, No, that's not for me.

[00:42:33.840] - Speaker 1
I never particularly pushed against my parents' taste.It was allThey had good taste. They had good taste. It was like top-schelf stuff in the house. If you look in his record collection, you'll see cool stuff. You'll see the Clash and Elvis Costello and the Rolling Stones. And you'll see one or two Billy Joel records. I know he respected Billy Joel, and he told me he I saw he came on his radar because Billy Joel opened for Kinky Friedmann somewhere in New York. I mean, that was a big Kinky Friedmann fan. So I know he respected Billy Joel. But I think a step beyond Billy Joel, like a Neil Diamond, there's no Neil Diamond in the house. So when I get older and be like, wow, Neil Diamond is really cool songwriter, that would be an example of going... It's almost like I went into the uncool. Yeah. Well, this is related to something we were talking about before, but As I said, a big inspiration for Father of the Bride was Bruce Springsteen's The River. The River, it has the title track and it has Hungary Heart, which was a hit. But I was reading some Bruce book.

[00:43:43.860] - Speaker 1
It might have been one of those 33 and a third books. Maybe it was about Born in the USA. And this is after Making Father of the Bride. I remember reading, they were talking about the albums that led into Born in the USA, which obviously is his most popular album. And they said something about, well, the river routinely falls dead last in Springsteen fan poles. And I was like, Oh, that's interesting. But the thing I loved about it was that it's classic. It's perfectly imperfect. You can tell he let it be shaggy. He let it have lightness and silliness. And it's like a joke I had with a friend of mine about how much we actually prefer the White Album to Sergeant Peppers. But Sergeant Peppers will always be the one that-Wins the poll. Wins the poll. Him and my friend's joke was he just kept saying, White Album is unelectible, man. I was like, Right, some albums are unelectible.

[00:44:41.180] - Speaker 2
White Album is my favorite, too.

[00:44:43.590] - Speaker 1
It's a favorite in the catalog. And yet I wouldn't even argue why, yeah, let Sergeant Pepper go take the heat. That one's supposed to be at the top of the polls. That's also true that born in the USA or Nebraska, there are two ends of the spectrum, but you can see what their constituencies are. And the river is somewhere else. And of course, it's had its moment in the sun, but partially because probably Bruce went out of his way to be like, let's celebrate the river's anniversary. But that's one that I find... Yeah, I go back to that more than his electable albums.

[00:45:21.460] - Speaker 2
Do you think if the river was a single album, it would have been better received?

[00:45:26.010] - Speaker 1
It would have been better received, but it would be less important in the discography. It's funny. I think even the White Album, I read some contemporary bad reviews.I mean, it's the White Album.Well, every album. Yeah, and you could see how the easiest criticism is like, Tiggies? What are we doing here?

[00:45:44.740] - Speaker 2
Have Empire Weekend ever done an acoustic set? Meaning an acoustic-only show anywhere.

[00:45:52.480] - Speaker 1
We've done so many sessions and small shows, usually put on by a radio station or something. It's funny you say that because I've been trying to be more thoughtful when we do these sessions rather than just play some punky song on an acoustic guitar and be unsatisfied with it, really think like, Well, which of our material might fit and how can we arrange it? And I've had this idea that One day I'd like to do some special tour. I don't know if it's more sit-down theaters or unique venues. That's our Unplugged Quiet thing. And I have a good name for it, the Quiet Dignity Tour.

[00:46:28.360] - Speaker 2
That's nice. I look forward I'm bored to that. I have a feeling it's going to be good.

[00:46:31.750] - Speaker 1
Yeah, you hear the songs differently.

[00:46:33.580] - Speaker 2
Yeah. It changes your relationship to the songs.

[00:46:36.780] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[00:46:38.630] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the period of finishing the fourth album cycle, thinking about the fifth album. What did you decide in advance? What happened in the studio that was not what you decided in advance?

[00:46:54.360] - Speaker 1
That was an interesting time. The pandemic cut the touring short a bit, so suddenly, I had a lot of time to think about the next album. And I think already, the pendulum is always swinging, at least internally within the band. After making our double album with the light next to the heavy and stuff, I felt like, all right, this one needs to be tight, have a sense of focus, maybe a more specific sense of place. And I found myself reflecting on old New York vibes and not living there anymore. I mean, I still spend plenty of time there, but it's not the main place I live. And what does that period of history represent to me, 20th century New York? So I found my mind going there. It's funny. And after talking about doing all this press, I can't always keep it straight. One thing I've been saying in some of the press, and this is true, is that on Father of the Bride, Ariel, who's slightly older than me. He's five years older than me. So he just remembers the '90s in a different way. And also, he's born and raised in LA, and he came of age in the punk world.

[00:48:09.310] - Speaker 1
And I remember thinking on Father the Bride, I was really throwing a very specific type of East Coast reference at him, with the jam bands and all this other stuff. And he can wrap his head around anything. But I remember thinking on this album, as we talked about it, and we talked about the trying to attempt a new type of hardness or heaviness. I could also feel like a way that we could become more in sync or something. Our shared references of punk rock, hip hop, '90s stuff. I felt like, all right, after doing this big, crazy album together, it was almost like I was more interested in finding common ground.

[00:48:57.090] - Speaker 2
Do you feel like the album is nostalgic?

[00:48:59.960] - Speaker 1
Yes. Well, it's a dangerous word because-For you.

[00:49:06.650] - Speaker 2
I don't mean stylistically, but I mean your experience of it. Do you feel like it's about a different time in your life? Are you looking back on a different time in your life?

[00:49:18.240] - Speaker 1
Yeah, but not just in my life. I'm almost in these half glimpsed memories of the world that I saw a tiny bit as as a kid or that I imagined from my parents or even my grandparents era. This is maybe only tangentially related. The album cover, which I found just cruising the internet, was taken by this guy, Steven Siegel, who is an amateur, but no less of an artist, a photographer in his 20s. That didn't become his main profession. Then we looked through all his other pictures, and there are all these very surreal pictures of these overturned subway cars. So we get a dialog going with him we'd like to use some of these images. And then at some point, as we're getting closer to the album coming out, he said, I also have quite a bit of video footage from that same era, which was pretty amazing because some of the footage was taken at the same time. So after looking at this image of this overturned subway car for years, see a video of a guy dropping sideways, like Inception style into this subway car. And I was like, whoa. And as we looked through all that, and as someone who's recently spent a lot of time looking through archival footage, you realize that It's pretty easy to find every year in any major city, some tourist who set up in the town square and panned around and said, oh, look, here's the Trafalgar Square, or here's a famous piazza.

[00:50:44.000] - Speaker 1
That's easy to find. Finding somebody who had an artistic eye filming the weird perimeter of a city or these strange moments in an era, that's harder to find. So we were incredibly blessed that Steven Siegel had all this footage. And I remember as I was editing the Capricorn video with the director and the editor and our whole creative team, and we were looking at these images, we all were struck by this feeling. They were like, this doesn't just look old. It looks like another planet. It looks like an alternate reality, which is not always how you feel looking at archival stuff. There was the nostalgia, which when I think about what does that word mean? A semi painful but pleasant feeling about something that you miss or something. But there's also this feeling where not only were you not there, it doesn't just feel like something that happened. It feels like something that exists on another plane of reality or something. And that's when all this stuff with time gets interesting, and the past starts to look more like the future and all those weird things. But these are all thoughts that have come about working on the album and looking at the images.

[00:51:56.560] - Speaker 2
When you think back to your time in New York, do you look back fondly on it?

[00:52:02.170] - Speaker 1
Yeah, sure. I do. I think it was definitely the place I came of age. But also, and I'm sure you can relate to this a little bit, growing up just outside the city, people who grew up in the city, that can be a real source of pride for them. So you never want to... Even if you were born there, even if your family is from there, if you didn't spend your age 5 to 18 there, you have to I'm from Manhattan, you're from Saqqqus. But the way I've always seen it is I've always just thought of the New York region, the tri-state area, which is about 30 million people. I've always just thought of it as the country that my family comes from in the place that I understand the best, in the place that I have true family history. And every branch of my family began their American journey in New York City. There's not a single exception. Even I had one grandma who was born in Romania, but she moved to the East Village when she was a little girl. So both my parents were born there. I was born there. And so even the New Jersey thing and having cousins in Westchester, knowing people from Long Island and Connecticut.

[00:53:18.430] - Speaker 1
To me, that's just the... It's the lens through which I understand everything. The same way if you were like Belgium, which is smaller than the tristate area. If you're a Belgian, you would understand generations of families through the Belgian lens, and you'd understand the link between the city and the country through the Belgian lens. And for me, that's the tristate area. So there's my time in the city as a resident. But more importantly, there's just this... It's the place, it's the culture.

[00:53:54.890] - Speaker 2
You said both my parents were born there. I was born there. Sounds like a lyric. And I'm just pointing it out because when you said it, it's like, Oh, yeah, I want to hear the rest of that song.

[00:54:03.960] - Speaker 1
Right. I've actually been working on one song that was almost on the album, and it's called New York Hospital. And I think it was partially just because I realized somehow very deep into our friendship, it came about that, Oh, me and Bayo were born at the same hospital, which at the time has the most bland name of all time. Maybe you remember, it was called New York Hospital. Now, I think it's part of the Cornell, whatever. It's one of these Upper East Side hospitals. But there's I love just that. That's the name of the hospital, New York Hospital. I was like, oh, that's cool that we were born in the same place the same year. And then naturally, at this phase of life, you think when it's no longer all about you, the the way it is when you're young and you think about, Oh, I'm in between. I think about the older generations and where they were born and how they grew up, and I think about the younger generations.

[00:54:54.430] - Speaker 2
Can you play me a little bit in New York Hospital on the guitar?

[00:54:57.800] - Speaker 1
Yeah, I could try. You're right. An acoustic guitar, it'll sound folky, which maybe we've experimented with different arrangements of it, but the main part.

[00:55:13.460] - Speaker 3
I messed up playing the ponies.

[00:55:19.130] - Speaker 1
I'm back to the grind, and I wanted to say that the unions invented the So thanks for your lives, and thanks for the days, when the village voice in the New York Times still smoldered in the flames.

[00:55:44.290] - Speaker 3
I was born in the New York hospital in the middle of a golden age. If you think you're born in hell, my son, in the desert's gilded cage. We were both born deep in an endless wall in the middle of a golden, middle of a golden age.

[00:56:04.570] - Speaker 1
There's a good riff that comes in. Yeah, so it's funny. We have some demos that are cool of that. I got to figure out if that belongs on the next album or something in between.

[00:56:19.530] - Speaker 2
Have you ever played the Ponies in your life?

[00:56:22.670] - Speaker 1
Yeah.

[00:56:23.290] - Speaker 2
You have really?

[00:56:24.490] - Speaker 1
I mean, of course, I primarily just like that as an old question phrase, like some guys and dolls playing the Ponies. But yeah, I've always had a degenerate friends who say, You want to go to the track? And I'm like, What do I even do here? And they show me how to do it.

[00:56:39.650] - Speaker 2
So you've been to the track?

[00:56:41.000] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I was at Santa Anita pretty recently, actually, a A buddy of mine, and he has a kid the same age as mine. He said, You want to bring him? And I was like, Okay. And we went. And it was pretty... I hadn't been in a while, but it was far out. And I was leaving with my little son getting to the car. And the valets looked at me and with a smile, holding my son's hand said, Oh, that's good. Start them early. It's like, wow.

[00:57:07.760] - Speaker 2
What was the scene there like? Tell me about the scene at Santa Anita.

[00:57:12.330] - Speaker 1
It's interesting because there's a restaurant that feels like a country club. So you get a little bit of a high class thing. Well, first of all, Santa Anita is a beautiful old building, probably from the teens or the 20s. And so you get all walks of life in there. And there's a part of it that feels like you're in Port Authority. So you're in Port Authority, and you see people who are like, you start thinking about, what's your deal, man? You look like pushing 80 by yourself, holding a plastic bag. And you're like, Where do you live? Do you have family? Those things. What's your story? And then you go to this restaurant, and you see people who have a high class thing going on, and they're ordering ice cream, Sundays, and steak, and stuff. So it's one of these classic places where you see... I guess horse racing really brings together different types of people. It's high class and low class at the same time.

[00:58:12.680] - Speaker 2
And does it match your memory of ever going when you were young? Is that an unchanged thing?

[00:58:20.370] - Speaker 1
Well, I didn't really go when I was young. I mean, definitely, my parents weren't taking me. Maybe more when I was a teenager and some friend of mine would be like, You want to check this out? So I've been. I don't have a deep connection to it.

[00:58:33.910] - Speaker 2
I was sure you hadn't gone. So the fact that you've ever gone is really impressive.

[00:58:40.140] - Speaker 1
But it's funny. So I have gone technically, but to say It's a big part of my life. No, but it's still.

[00:58:47.200] - Speaker 2
It's like you're referencing something that you actually have experienced. It's not pure fiction.

[00:58:54.720] - Speaker 1
Yeah. And I've been lucky in life that I've known a lot of different type of people with all sorts of different backgrounds and interests and stuff. I've always been curious about what other people like. Yeah, I feel like I've had a lot of cool experiences in life just being taken into somebody else's world.

[00:59:15.840] - Speaker 2
Was anyone in your family ever in a union?

[00:59:18.750] - Speaker 1
Yeah, my dad.

[00:59:19.830] - Speaker 2
Amazing. I also would have guessed no.

[00:59:22.970] - Speaker 1
No, in fact, with that, I've thought about... I'm still working on the song, but there's a lot of generational stuff because I'm thinking about my father in the song, but also talking to my son a little bit because I had this feeling where I thought, Well, I was born in April in Manhattan, which is a lot of people I think would agree is one of the most beautiful times and places in the world. It depends what part of Manhattan, but we can all agree. Spring time in New York. Spring is a good place. Yeah. And whereas my son was born in August in LA, so Hopefully, the song goes deeper, but I just think, If you think you're born in hell, my son. August in LA sounds like hell. I was thinking about the generations of my dad. Even that was a funny little play on words to me. I said, I must start playing the ponies, I'm back to the grind, and I wanted to say that the unions invented the weekend. Because people say the unions, there used to be a bumper sticker. You enjoy the weekend? Thank a labor union. So there's all something about, well, in one sense, the unions had been a vampire weekend because my dad was in a union, and so were his parents, too.

[01:00:49.220] - Speaker 1
They were teachers. My dad, he was in IATSE, which certainly includes everybody who builds sets in New York, or I guess in the whole country for TV and Broadway, too, I think. Yeah. So there's a lot of that. I always like stuff where it seems a little bit out there, but then there's some real connection, too.

[01:01:12.440] - Speaker 2
If we went through your catalog and we talked about. We just talked about the first two lyrics of a song that is not finished or released, and there's a great deal of personal depth already in those two lyrics. If we went through the catalog, would you say it's the nature of your writing? Are you very connected to the material in that way?

[01:01:40.060] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I mean…

[01:01:41.850] - Speaker 2
That's fascinating.

[01:01:43.660] - Speaker 1
I think so. One thing's for sure. There's never been a vampire weekend lyric. Well, there haven't been many vampire weekend lyrics that are purely random. There's definitely a style of music, especially indie music, where it seems like it doesn't mean much or it's purposefully random. People said that about Bob Dylan, they said about a pavement or something guided by voices. But the reason that all those artists have a deep passionate fan base is because it's not actually random. Even when you don't get it, you feel it or something. But I think there's a lot of vampire weekend lyrics that they aren't even this abstract thing that you feel, but it might not make sense, but it's still meaningful. Sometimes it's just literally meaningful. A couple of people had asked me about a line on the new record. It talks about the sandhogs in the street, the chickens in her bedroom. In New York, the people who work under the ground are called sandhogs. They build the tunnels, and they go all the way back to building the Brooklyn Bridge. But now they're working on the water tunnels, the subway tunnels. I was always very interested in them.

[01:02:52.580] - Speaker 1
My dad had been some tunnel inspector at some point in life before he started working on movies. And then the chickens in her... I knew somebody had chickens in her bedroom. That's more common than you think. People have animals in New York apartments for various reasons. But that one I actually saw with my own eyes. Do you remember there was a tiger in an apartment in Harlem? Yeah. The pictures were amazing of the city coming in to try to take a full-grown tiger out of an apartment. Yeah.

[01:03:21.590] - Speaker 2
How do you decide what does and doesn't make it on an album?

[01:03:26.910] - Speaker 1
Usually, it's not that hard because it's never whittling down dozens of songs. Although I do want to try that one day. I just don't know if I'll ever have dozens of songs, but it is, they say, with Thriller, they were like, We went through 200 songs, but they probably had some of the best songwriters in the world submitting songs and listening and be like, Can we work with it? The idea of whittling down 200 songs to the 10 to 12, I love that concept, but there's usually not that many to begin with that are fully formed songs with the lyrics and production ideas and arrangement ideas. And in the case of this album, which almost could have been 11, I think because every version we worked on, it felt strongly with an acoustic guitar, we just felt like, You know what? We have enough acoustic strumminess on this album. This doesn't quite feel like it fits. Some of the imagery in the song is very connected to other songs, maybe almost too connected. So I guess that was a pretty typical does it fit conversation.

[01:04:31.800] - Speaker 2
But you also said you had the beginnings of step long before that album. It's not unusual for you to have good pieces that just for whatever reason the time is not right.

[01:04:44.440] - Speaker 1
Exactly. Yeah. Or Hannah Hunt. We tried in the Contra era. It just didn't totally make sense. Yeah. Sometimes it's just a gut feeling.

[01:04:53.930] - Speaker 2
Do they change Hannah Hunt from the Contra era? Would it have been different had you recorded it then?

[01:05:00.100] - Speaker 1
Oh, yeah, totally. That was one of those ones that as we played it as a band, my heart just sank because I was like, What? I like this song. Then I realized that song wasn't made to sound live per se. Then at some point, I remember one of my little references for how that song could sound. I said, What if the XX made a country song? That was a guiding principle. If the XX did make a country song, it wouldn't be four people in a room playing drums, electric. It would be beat-oriented.

[01:05:29.790] - Speaker 2
Let's Let's listen to a little Hannah Hunt. Sure. Is there a Hannah Hunt?

[01:05:36.650] - Speaker 1
There's somebody named Hannah Hunt. She was just someone we all knew in college and very cool person, but the song is not about anything about her, per se. This truly was inspired by how good her name was. Even in some ways, the fact that she pronounced it differently helps have that separation where it's almost inspired, but it is a different name.

[01:06:06.810] - Speaker 2
Let's hear a little bit.

[01:06:24.880] - Speaker 3
A gardener told me some plants move, but I could not believe it. To me and Hannah hunt, saw crawling vines and weeping willows as we made away from Providence to Phoenix. A man of faith said, hidden as ♪ I just could see what I was thinking. ♪ I just smiled and told him that was only true of Hannah. ♪ And we glided on through Waverly, Lincoln. ♪ Our days were long, our nights no longer. Count the seconds, watching the hours. Though we live on the US dollar, you and me, we got our own sense of time. In Santa Barbara, Hannah cried to miss those freezing beaches. I walked into town to buy some kinder for the fire. Hannah took The New York Times up into pieces. If I can't trust you, then damn it, Hannah, there's no future. There's no answer. Though we live on the US dollar, you and me, we got our own sense of time.

[01:09:00.090] - Speaker 4
Without your trust, you're in diamond, Hannah.

[01:09:11.890] - Speaker 3
There's no future, there's no answer.

[01:09:16.750] - Speaker 4
Don't remember how we live on the US dollar, you and me, we got our own sense of time. Without your trust, you're in diamond high now.

[01:09:30.320] - Speaker 2
There's no future, there's At what point in the process did you decide to sing the last chorus up?

[01:10:04.770] - Speaker 1
That was when we started working on it.

[01:10:07.690] - Speaker 2
From the beginning?

[01:10:08.540] - Speaker 1
No, no, no, no, no, And then Rostem was like, It should get big. He said, Can you sing it up an octave? This is why it's so great to have different points of views, because I remember saying, No, it's too high. He was very encouraging, Just push it, push it, you can do it. Then I realized, right, so I had my idea for it to be small and austere, but actually that's what turns the song into a journey, is to jump up. Because I remember being like, I don't know if I can do it. He said, Do it. We did it. That part gets big. Then it gets small again. Obviously, it was a brilliant call on his part because it's-It's really surprising. It really works. It's surprising. And it's funny, too, how Probably because I reacted so negatively to trying to play the song live, because, of course, you would never get that level of minimalism. I don't care who it is. If you get four people in a room, you're not going to get that level of minimalism. So I was so attached to my minimalist idea that even at first I was like, I don't want it to get big.

[01:11:16.460] - Speaker 1
My whole thing is I don't want it to be big. Now, looking back, I can see the 2020 vision, why that was such a great call, because it makes you appreciate the smallness on either side more, and it's an emotionally cathartic moment. And It's exactly the type of thing that sometimes as a songwriter, you might not want to do because the song is very emotional, but it's understated. And for me to sing that high, let's say, beyond the top of my range, that's letting the understated emotion go away and getting actually emotional. There's probably the part of me that wanted to be a bit cooler or closer to the vest, but that's what sells the It's like that emotion after this quiet road trip story.

[01:12:05.100] - Speaker 2
Big feeling. What's also interesting about it is it gets loud first in the instrumental section, and while it seems loud, the instrumental section, it's not really that big or loud. It's only big and loud in comparison to what came before it. So it seems bombastic, but if the song started that way, you wouldn't even think that it's It was ordinary. Yes. But then when the vocal comes in high, then it's like, Oh, this is like it really has gone somewhere.

[01:12:38.280] - Speaker 1
Right. Yeah, totally. When I first started writing the song, there's somewhere there's a must be a recording because I remember still being in college, just before Vampire Weekend started. I'm sure when I wrote it, it was like, A gardener told me some plants move. It probably was more like a country song or, I can't trust you, the land of pain. I didn't find that particularly exciting, especially when I look back to what seemed cool to me in the early days of Empire Weekend, but I knew that I liked the song. I liked the lyrics. That's why it necessitated multiple attempts.

[01:13:30.610] - Speaker 2
Does it happen that for a period of time, you don't like something or you don't like a style, and then years later, you come back around to it and realize, Oh, I really do like this, or you changed? It stayed the same, obviously.

[01:13:43.080] - Speaker 1
Right. Yeah.

[01:13:44.200] - Speaker 2
Do you come around to things?

[01:13:45.690] - Speaker 1
Oh, totally. Sometimes I think I need years to accurately judge something that we work on. And also, context is everything. What we do is make so decisions based on what we think feels appropriate or cool or whatever. And that is totally a game you play with culture and time. And whether you want to be in step with the times or out of step or just in step with yourself. Yeah, it still is all about time and timing. I revisit old demos all the time and change a lyrics, change an arrangement, and suddenly it feels relevant again. But one for sure. I just feel like that whatever this game that we're playing is, it's never been as simple as, is it good or not? I have some memory of a friend of ours overhearing some conversation in the studio. This was years ago. Also an artist in his own right, but he was hearing me go on about why I thought a certain drum sound felt uncool to me or played out. I was talking in terms of a '90s rock drum sound versus an '80s pop, something like that. The guy said something. I think he was trying to be encouraging, but he said something along the lines of, You're worrying so much about drum sounds and errors and stuff.

[01:15:13.430] - Speaker 1
Just speak from your heart and don't worry about that stuff. If it's good, it's good. I just remember thinking, I saw where he was coming from, but I just remember thinking, No, that's not true. That's just not the game that we're playing. There's other rules, too. Yeah. If the day comes, we want to make an unadorned, acoustic album, even that will be a choice, right?

[01:15:37.700] - Speaker 2
I'm sure you'll spend years thinking about it.

[01:15:40.850] - Speaker 1
Right. There's so many types of unadorned, acoustic albums. I want to make it on a four track. I want to make it digital.

[01:15:49.440] - Speaker 2
What would be, is there one song that you think is representative of the new album?

[01:15:58.880] - Speaker 1
On the new Let me pull that up. As we get to this album, it becomes more difficult just because this is the newest. Had very recently put so much thought into how it all fits together. It gets harder to zero in on one song. I mean, there's different modes at work in this album. I think maybe a good one is classical because it's a... I always just call everything fast punky. That's just the shorthand we have in the band. To it's in the punkier vein of Vampire Weekend. But it starts with an acoustic guitar doing this. Then the drums come in and they're big, and they have their own weird swing, but they're reminiscent of hip hop. But then the thing that really sells it, which was Ariel's call, is this big, upright bass. For me, when I think of this song, and... I mean, Ariel talked about it, too. We're not the exact same age, but relatively older, millennial, younger Gen X who grew up where the most important new music to us was punk/alternative rock and hip hop. The idea of making a high energy song you could call punky that had the weight of an upright bass like we loved in a tribe called Quest or some Beastie Boys or a lot of hip hop, the idea of fusing that, which is harder than it seems was a lifelong mission.

[01:17:34.910] - Speaker 1
I don't know, not everybody has to see it that way because as much as punk and hip hop have always been in dialog since the early days, it can be really corny just to do punk vocals over a hip hop beat. But even for us, growing up in the shadow of all the amazing work and the fusions of what you've done and that we grew up with, it still is a lifelong ambition to make something that has that jazzy weightiness of hip hop with the drums and the bass, which is always interesting because sometimes even the hardest beat, it's not as hard as you thought it was. You realized, Oh, wait, you were sampling these old funk drummers who were playing really light, all that stuff. But to have that energy. To me, Because this album has both this alternative rock punky side and this hip hop side, this is maybe the song where it gets married the most.

[01:18:26.710] - Speaker 2
Let's listen to it.

[01:18:30.970] - Speaker 4
In times of war, the educated class knew what to In times of peace, their pupils couldn't meet your baby blues.

[01:19:04.900] - Speaker 3
Four hundred million animals competing for the zoo. It's such a bleak sunrise. Oh, true. Unkind and un-natural. How the crew, with time, becomes classical. I know that was for a shake, shake, this burning body's break is clear. Something's going to change, and when it does, which classical remains.

[01:19:59.920] - Speaker 4
The temp was gone but still a single column stands today.

[01:20:08.500] - Speaker 3
That second feeling fades but never really goes away. A staircase up to nothingness inside your DNA. Well, that's a bleak sunrise. Untrue, uncind and un-natural. How When the crew, with time, becomes classical.

[01:20:36.920] - Speaker 4
I know that wilds fire, shack, shake, principle, and battle break is clear.

[01:20:43.600] - Speaker 3
Something's going to change.

[01:20:45.640] - Speaker 4
And when it does, which class could remain? ♪ Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, Untrue, unkind, and on natural.

[01:21:38.400] - Speaker 3
How the crew, with time, becomes classical. I know that once, for a shack, shake, which is fun, and by the break, it's clear. Something's going to change, and when it does, which class could remain?

[01:22:16.010] - Speaker 2
It's a really beautiful song. Thanks. That's a bleak sunrise, untrue, unkind, and unnatural. Really beautiful words.

[01:22:26.310] - Speaker 1
Oh, thanks. There's something, too, that I liked about how it turned out because it feels new. The combination of elements, it feels like new, and yet there's something very traditional about the songwriting. Not every song needs it, but when you have a song that has a true pre-chorus, I just always feel more sophisticated.

[01:22:50.570] - Speaker 2
The pre-chorus really does sound like a chorus in this song. When the fast-talking part of the chorus comes, I find it surprising. Like a chorus tops it, it's really It's a really good feeling.

[01:23:01.170] - Speaker 1
Well, I appreciate you saying that because that's what I love in songs. You know what I was just listening to? Somehow this came up randomly, but I hadn't thought about in a long time. It was just Video Killed the Radio Star? Yeah. I mean, it's a pretty simplistic way to talk about music, but it's like, Is every part good? You realize that song has so many parts. I heard you on the wireless back in '52. Then the course, Video Killed the Radio Star. But by the time it gets to the new melody, I I guess you could call it the Bridge. You are the radio star. Just like, How many do you have? It's like every part, you have a great new idea, and they're all equally good. I love when a song can do that.

[01:23:46.880] - Speaker 2
Should we listen to Capricorn or so? Sure.

[01:23:53.500] - Speaker 3
The word looked When God was on your side, who bears the future? Do they care why? I know you're tired of trying. Listen clearly, you don't have to try Capcom, the year that you were born. Finish fast, and the next one wasn't yours.

[01:24:32.180] - Speaker 4
Too old, too young, too young to live alone. Sifting through centuries for moments of your own. Why is it called Capricorn?

[01:24:52.240] - Speaker 1
As I recall, I had some... I was just thinking about people who were born right at the end of the year, and I was like, Oh, that's a good metaphor for a larger thing I was thinking about, just that feeling of being a little bit in between the Tony Soprano thing of I didn't get in on the ground floor. I was born too late. And so I was saying, Well, what if you were born in the final days of the year? So this year that you'll always be associated with, you'll be filling in forms for the rest of your life. And yet you didn't really have a taste of it. What I said, the year that you were born, finished fast. The next one wasn't yours. So then I was like, I don't know enough about astrology to know it off the top of my head. So I said, Well, what would you be if you were born December 30th? And I saw Capricorn. So then, I mean, how lucky was I that Capricorn rimes with born if it had been something else. Worked out. Yeah, it worked out. So you had the song first.

[01:25:48.480] - Speaker 2
How far into the process did this song come?

[01:25:52.130] - Speaker 1
This was very early. And if I played you the first demo of Capricorn, it wouldn't sound all that different. It would have all the main elements. I remember Ariel and I working on that early, early in the process. I remember going to him, having... There's a piano motif that existed on its own that just worked as a post-chorus. I think actually I came in with the chorus, maybe. Then we had to work backwards to come up with a verse. We worked on that. I remember over two days, we had more or less sketched out the whole song, which for us is very fast. It doesn't mean we were done, but he mocked up those drums, and the drums plus the acoustic plus the piano. We're like, Oh, this works. Then I remember being at home that night, and I was like, I wonder if this song could have a part that sounded like My Bloody Valentine. Then I came back the next day and he said, What if on the second chorus, it went to My Bloody Valentine? He's like, Okay. Then he busted out the whammy pedal, and then it gets big. That's how that came about.

[01:27:04.240] - Speaker 2
Typically, do you bring in a song to work on before all the lyrics are done? Is that a normal thing or not really?

[01:27:11.430] - Speaker 1
Yeah, all the time. I feel like once the chorus is more or less set, it counts. If you have a chorus, you're allowed to then spend four years thinking about just the right third verse. But if you come in with a verse and you don't really have a chorus, you're not really ready to work on it. That's been my experience. I think the final track, Hope, is pretty important. It just definitely feels like new territory lyrically. It's only five verses, but still for us, that's a lot of verses. That song is interesting because I think there's always been some folk music underpinning to what we do. But this one is... We didn't arrange it exactly like a folk song, but I think it summarizes the album, a little bit of the worldview and the spiritual worldview of the album. And then just also in terms of the history of the band, it's the closest we've come to just a folk song because it has this chorus that comes over and I'm going to, I hope you let it go. I hope you let it go. The enemy's invincible, I hope you let it go. Then a bunch of verses.

[01:28:32.530] - Speaker 1
We took it to a different place. We wrote an instrumental bridge. But it's...

[01:28:40.000] - Speaker 2
What's it about?

[01:28:41.240] - Speaker 1
Well, it's funny. With so many of these songs, the This is how I always feel. It's like at first it just pops into my head and I think that'll do. That sounds good. Sounds like a song. Then as I work on it, I think about it. It almost never happens the opposite way where I'm like, I have a strong feeling that I I want to put into words, and then I do it. No. I have some words I want to put in a song, and then I think about the feeling, and then either it resonates with me and I keep it or it doesn't. I think... Well, we were talking before about how I still feel very connected to modern vampires, but sometimes I look at some of the seriousness or the ajita of that record as being the ajita of youth. I think of this as the ajita of being older. I guess the simplest way to put it is that your whole life, you have people telling you this incredibly simple thing, which is more or less the serenity prayer of AA, which I've never been a part of, but I know people have been a part of it.

[01:29:51.410] - Speaker 1
Even just being on the periphery of it, I found it very deep and inspiring. Accept the things you cannot change. You have people tell you that your whole life, and it's so logical, it's so rational, makes sense. Or even when people say, Well, you can't change other people. You can change yourself. And you're like, yeah, right. But I think I should probably change some other people in the meantime. And even you think about it can be borderline infuriating when you're young or even well into adulthood. It can be infuriating when somebody tells you, I understand that situation is causing you stress and anxiety and pain, but I encourage you to let it go. That can make you angry. It's like, God, shut the fuck up. You're not in my shoes. And then as you get older, you start to realize some of the people give you that advice, they have been in your shoes. They've been actually in, I don't know what the right metaphor is, bigger shoes, heavier shoes than you have. And you start to realize, right, it's such a misguided judgment to say that optimists or easygoing people are living in the virtue untested category.

[01:30:57.210] - Speaker 1
Because I've come to realize actually some of the chillest people people I know or the most optimistic, or another way to say it, the people who have the best relationship with life itself, people who can really love life, or another phrase, amor fati, love their fate. Sometimes those are people who have actually been through more than many people could even imagine, the difficult situations, suffering, things like that. I guess if I had to summarize that song, it's about that hard-won feeling of getting older and realizing That the answer that's presented to you often in life that seems so annoying, borderline infuriating, let it go. And you're like, But what about this situation? Let it go. What about that situation? Let it go. That that's not a cloying, childish sentiment or the sentiment of a delusional optimist, that there's actually deep wisdom in it. Whether or not I fully embraced or embodied in it, in my life, it's something that at least I now understand as an ideal to aspire to. And that's not even something I understood when I was younger.

[01:32:03.070] - Speaker 2
Are the verses examples?

[01:32:06.530] - Speaker 1
Yeah. I'm just trying to hit it from so many different sides. The song opens that goes like, The bull has got the mad adult, the US Army won the war, the mean and dire, the metaphor, I hope you let it go. And when I first wrote it, it was the US Army lost the war. And this is one of these little things I fix it on for a while. And then I realized, I don't want it to be so simplistic that it's like, oh, you lost? Just let it go. And again, look, the US Army, some people root for it. Some people don't. You could look at it different ways. But I like the idea of having both the matador getting gored by the bull. That's objectively an L for the Matador, but also the idea of an army winning. That's something you have to let go of, too. Whether you're the victim or the winner, all of it has to be because essentially, it's the ephemeral nature of all phenomena. So, yeah, that's essentially what the song is. I really had to put thought into it and kick the tires on it over the years to make sure.

[01:33:21.480] - Speaker 1
I just don't want it to be some simplistic thing where everything that's listed is obviously bad. I really like that some of my favorite verses are ones that could be good or bad, depending who you are. There's one part that's a...

[01:33:37.090] - Speaker 3
The embassy is abandoned now. The flag that flew is on the ground. The pain in burn, the statue drowned. I hope you let it go.

[01:33:48.290] - Speaker 1
I was thinking about the idea of an overrun embassy. It's something we see over and over again. We'll continue to see forever. It can be the end of a moment, a revolution. It can It can be something somewhat peaceful. It can be something incredibly violent. It can be a huge win for a person, a group of people. It can be a huge loss for another group of people.

[01:34:17.070] - Speaker 2
Do you ever have insights into old songs of yours lyrically over time?

[01:34:26.210] - Speaker 1
Yeah, definitely. When I look back to modern vampires in particular, and I think about a song like Yaha. I think when I wrote it, it probably came from the point of view, which is just the cultural milieu that I lived in, which is obviously God is not real. It's not even a question. Depending where you grew up or how you were raised or what faith you have, that could be a legitimate question. But I think- It was just accepted. It was just accepted. Even when I picture deep stone or conversations I may have had with friends, there was never one where somebody said, Hey, you think God is real? Again- Never came up. It never came up because that wasn't part of it. When I think about that song at the time, which is addressing just the concept of God, I think it's coming from a place like, Obviously, I'm talking to myself here because how could it be that a being through the... How does that song go? What keys it Through the fire, through the flames.

[01:35:32.260] - Speaker 3
Through the fire, through the flames. You won't even say your name. Only I am that I am. But who could ever live that way? Sorry. Who could ever live that way? Who could ever live that way? Through the fire, through the flames. You won't even say your My name, only I am that I am.

[01:36:04.510] - Speaker 1
But who could ever live that way? So that idea of like, yeah, coming from this place, it doesn't make any sense that you would say, I am that I am, which is the tetragrammaton, right? The Y-H-W-H. So I think from that point of view, when I think about at the time, and I probably wondered, what was the point of that song? Did I just think it was cool to delve into something more serious? At the time, I thought of it as, It doesn't make any sense. Nobody could live that way. Just I am that I am. It doesn't make sense. But now I look back on it and I think, Well, if it didn't make sense, why did I care? You know what I mean? There's a lot of things that don't make that much sense, and you just can let it go. But there was clearly something that was drawing me in a about it. And I look back on it now and I think a human being trying to have a conversation with something with the infinite and saying, how can it be that with all this change and these things, that you're just out there saying, I am that I am.

[01:37:17.540] - Speaker 1
How can you live that way? And now I realize, well, the person asking that question is not like the sophisticated lawyer who is putting God in its place. That person is confused and angry and I'm looking for something deeper. So when I think about that song now, I just see it differently.

[01:37:36.970] - Speaker 2
Do you think it spoke to you because... I'm making this up. You were evolving your position, and you were still on the old side of the position, and it's almost like you were arguing with some part of yourself, and you're still arguing for the old position But now, over time, you look back and you see, I've actually moved to the other side of this.

[01:38:06.110] - Speaker 1
Right. Yeah, that makes sense. I guess if a song is about an argument, then at different times in your life, you could fall on either side of it. Yeah.

[01:38:14.650] - Speaker 2
Maybe the reason it was meaningful to you is because the part of you that was going to be let go of wanted to state its position. It was stating its case.

[01:38:29.440] - Speaker 1
Yeah. Yeah. No, it's funny because I feel like that happens so often where... Yeah, especially when you're going through some internal change. I think all human beings are like that. Sometimes you're having an argument or you're explaining your position on something. Even As you're saying it, you're saying it because you know it's wrong or because you're ready to let it go, or you're making the argument one more time for for old time's sake. And it's funny, I think about talking about that. This in particular me think about, I felt very connected over the last however many years to this old English hym, Abide with Me. Do you know it? It came on my radar because Thelonious Monk did a cover of it in the '60s. Again, I wasn't out there looking for religious music or hyms. Like all urban sophisticates, I listen to cool '60s jazz sometimes. I heard this like, Oh, Thelonious Monk doing Abide with Me. And I was like, What is this? It's a very pretty melody. And then I went and listened to the lyrics of the, I guess it's a 19th century hym. I won't be able to play it on guitar because I've never really song it.

[01:39:35.970] - Speaker 1
But the line that's always stuck out to me is, Change and decay in all I see. Thou who changest not, abide with me. It's interesting because rather than the idea of the world surrounded by bad things, change and decay, rather than saying, Well, therefore, I feel totally disconnected from this world. And if there is a creator or a force, an organizing principle behind all this, then I don't like it. Rather than saying, and I just proved how absurd existence is because I'm surrounded by change and decay, this is the opposite. It's saying, Because the nature of physical reality is change and decay, which is true, thou who changest not the infinite, the eternal, rather than judging you, I'm asking for help. Abide with me. And In a way, I look at it now, I'm like, Oh, that's some of the same concept. It's just a different attitude to bring to it. Yeah, the one I listen to a lot is Thelonious Monk, which is instrumental, but it just gives you a sense of the pretty melody.

[01:41:14.920] - Speaker 4
Come back with me.

[01:41:32.920] - Speaker 1
So then below is the King's College, Cambridge.

[01:41:39.620] - Speaker 4
Come fight with me, The stars be even died. The darkness deepens, Lord with me alive. When other elders bid and come for sleep. Head of the headress, all alike with me.

[01:42:32.040] - Speaker 1
Every verse is a different address. The first one is, Help of the Helpless, Abide with me, and then, Change and decay, and all that I see. Any piece of art, song, whatever. People say this all the time, Oh, everybody always thought the world was ending. That's something people say. There's something nice about imagining because there's so much energy goes into making us feel like we're living through a unique time of change and decay. And then to imagine whenever this was written, well before our era, well before our parents or our grandparents era, that somebody was sitting down and saying, Change and decay, in all that I see, thou who changes not abide with me. There is some comfort in that, that change and decay is the nature of reality and that fight- That's the nature of the material world. Yeah, right. Yes, exactly. To know that that's something that as long as there's been humans, people have been wrestling with and that there's nothing new that we're dealing with. Frankly, there's no new insight either. People have clocked exactly what you just said about the nature of the material world and examined it and thought about it and transcended it without the aid of whatever or technology or the internet and stuff.

[01:44:02.210] - Speaker 1
And there's something very powerful in feeling connected to that relationship between the dialog between the temporal and the eternal between the human and what some people might call the divine. So yeah, I think the last few years, this hymn has just been something that I felt like I wanted to listen to a lot. And there's a lot of powerful lyrics in it.

[01:44:27.180] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the experience of singing live. What is happening in your head when you're singing live? Are you thinking about the lyrics? Are you thinking about singing? Are you looking at what's happening around you? Where's your mind on stage in the song?

[01:44:48.570] - Speaker 1
The honest answer is that it's all over the place and that there are times... The difference as I've gotten older is I see the importance of bringing it back. Sometimes when I was younger, it's just, get through the show, whatever it takes. Get through the show, get through the tour. Whereas now, I think, just like I try to remember about any activity, no, I'm here. Let me not just get through it. Let me exist in it. And this concert is a particularly good one. That's worth doing when you're waiting in line at the grocery store. It's especially worth doing when you're singing songs that are connected to your life in your history and your relationships and stuff. So yeah, my mind wanders. I try to bring it back. Of course, there's little anxieties about, Wait, do I remember how to play the guitar rift that's coming up? And things like that. But of course, the best experiences are when I'm engaging in the song. And if I can have that moment where I feel like I'm performing it well and I feel connected to the moment and the feeling of all these people coming together on stage and the audience, and I feel like my mind is going through the meaning of the words, whether or not I wrote it.

[01:46:07.100] - Speaker 1
We were covering Joker Man, the Dylan song, quite a bit. And that's a lot of verses. It's a mysterious song. And eventually, I came to just love being on stage and just performing that song and thinking about it at the same time.

[01:46:22.780] - Speaker 2
Tell me about the difference between performing a song you wrote versus doing a cover.

[01:46:27.910] - Speaker 1
With enough time, there's no difference. That's what's interesting.

[01:46:31.900] - Speaker 2
Do you feel more freedom with a cover or no?

[01:46:36.950] - Speaker 1
Not necessarily. Because we've always taken these long periods of time away from touring and between albums, sometimes when we get back in the rehearsal room and looking at these songs, I am looking at them with fresh eyes, and sometimes not that differently as if it's a cover. That's not to say that I know that could make it sound Oh, I feel disconnected from just covering my own material. No, it's just that same level of-You're not the same person who wrote those songs.

[01:47:07.570] - Speaker 2
We evolve, we change, our lives change. Everything changes.

[01:47:12.350] - Speaker 1
Yeah, it just means something new to me.

[01:47:15.730] - Speaker 2
I think in some ways, that's a good thing. If you're re-engaging with an old song as if you didn't write it, in some way, maybe gives it more life.

[01:47:28.390] - Speaker 1
Yeah, totally. Because sometimes it makes me more curious about the song where I think, What did I mean by that? Because in a good way, sometimes with songwriting, you're on autopilot. Again, source, where do these ideas come from? We can pretend they come from us. If most creative people are honest, you're like, Well, what part of you did it come from? The good ones, they just come. That's why even when I do it, it's funny to be talking in this period where I've just done a big wave of press and interviews. There are times where I do my best to contextualize things and talk about what I was thinking or what the band was thinking without ever getting too personal or playing myself by sharing things I don't want to share, talking about special people in my life and what they've been through, all this stuff that I find distasteful. But you do your best. But every once in a while, I do feel like I wish I could say to a lot of people, I'll get back to you in 10 years, because only with time will I have some sense of it. When you sit down and say, What was going through your head when you were writing the song?

[01:48:44.530] - Speaker 1
Almost always the answer is nothing. The ideas come from some other place, and then you have some fun arranging them and talking about them.

[01:48:56.520] - Speaker 2
That comes after, though. That comes after. The inspired moment is not intellectual. Then the intellectual work happens after. It's like, what does it mean? I know I like the way this sounds. I know this works in the song. What's it about?

[01:49:13.710] - Speaker 1
I've always liked the metaphor of your discography as a bit of a story. Sometimes, chapter three makes more sense when you get to chapter five and you say, right now I see how that was a bridge or that was a detour, or that was a setup.
